The Project Gutenberg EBook of Ben o' Bill's, The Luddite, by 
Daniel Frederick Edward Sykes and George Henry Walker

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Ben o' Bill's, The Luddite
       A Yorkshire Tale

Author: Daniel Frederick Edward Sykes
        George Henry Walker

Release Date: January 20, 2017 [EBook #54030]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEN O' BILL'S, THE LUDDITE ***




Produced by John Parkinson




Ben o' Bill's, THE LUDDITE: A Yorkshire Tale, by D. F. E. Sykes, LL.B.


Ben o' Bill's,

the Luddite:

A Yorkshire Tale.

By

D. F. E. Sykes, LL.B.

And

Geo. Henry Walker

LONDON.

Simpkin, Marshall, Hamilton, Kent, & Co. Ltd.

HUDDERSFIELD.

The Advertiser Press, Ltd

About the author.

D F E Sykes was a gifted scholar, solicitor, local politician, and
newspaper proprietor. He listed his own patrimony as 'Fred o' Ned's o'
Ben o' Billy's o' the Knowle' a reference to Holme village above
Slaithwaite in the Colne Valley where many of the events in the novel
take place. As the grandson of a clothier, his association with the
woollen trade would be a valuable source of material for his novels, but
also the cause of his downfall when, in 1883, he became involved in a
bitter dispute between the weavers and the mill owners.

When he was declared bankrupt in 1885 and no longer able to practise as
a solicitor he left the area and travelled abroad to Ireland and Canada.
On his return to England he struggled with alcoholism and was prosecuted
by the NSPCC for child neglect. Eventually he was drawn back to
Huddersfield and became an active member of the Temperance Movement. He
took to researching local history and writing, at first in a local
newspaper, then books such as 'The History of Huddersfield and its
Vicinity'. He also wrote four novels. It was not until the 1911 Census,
after some 20 years as a writer, that he finally states his profession
as 'author'.

In later life he lived with his wife, the daughter of a Lincolnshire
vicar, at Ainsley House, Marsden. He died of a heart attack following an
operation at Huddersfield Royal Infirmary on 5th June 1920 and was
buried in the graveyard of St Bartholomew's in Marsden.

Introduction.

Although the book was initially credited to D. F. E. Sykes and G. H.
Walker, G. H. Walker's name is missing from the third edition, and it is
essentially Sykes' work.

First published in 1898, it is a novel which deserves wider recognition,
as it deals with surprisingly contemporary issues, but it is as a social
history of the period that it stands out. Sykes' use of the local
dialect, the entertaining asides that he includes and his skill at
sketching characters and their lives, at a period of such turmoil in the
Colne Valley, add to its value.

It is interesting that, as a historian, Sykes chose to embellish the
facts, that were available to him at the time, with fiction, and his
purpose must have been literary. Historians rightly take issue in this
matter, but he is clear on his sympathy for their cause and the
background and reasoning behind these events, though he draws back on
the murder of Horsfall. The Luddites were not mindless machine breakers
but desperate men, in poverty and despair, fighting for a voice to be
heard against uncaring mill owners and a corrupt government.

This is undoubtedly Sykes' best novel, a sound history of the Luddites
and a good read.

PREFACE

AT the York Special Commission in 1812, sixty-six persons were tried for
various offences in connection with the Luddite rising against the
introduction of machinery. Of these sixty six seventeen were executed,
one reprieved, six transported for seven years, seven were acquitted,
seventeen were discharged on bail, fifteen by proclamation, and one
stood over but was not called on.

The story, Ben o' Bill's, is mostly true, and the authors have not felt
called upon to vary in any material respects the story as it was gleaned
in part from the lips and in part from the papers of the narrator.

It is proper to say that the Ben Walker of the narrative was of kin to
neither of the writers.

The thanks of the authors are tendered to Dr. Edwin Dean, of
Slaithwaite, and to the Justices of the West Riding for permission to
reproduce the portraits of Dr. Dean and of Sir Joseph Radcliffe.

DEDICATED

(Without Permission)

TO

MARY LOUISA SYKES,

THE FRIEND OF BOTH,

AND

WIFE OF ONE OF

THE AUTHORS



CHAPTER I.

IT HURTS me sore that folk in these days should so little understand the
doings of us Luddites. To hear young people talk, the Luddites were
miscreants that well, deserved the hanging they got--a set of idle,
dissolute knaves and cut-throats the country was well rid of. Nay,
worse, many young lads with a college learning seem to know next to
nothing about them, and talk as though all great deeds were done in
far-of parts, and as though of heroes and martyrs England has none to
show. I am little apt at writing, and my hand is stiff and cramped with
years. But my memory is good still, and I can remember better the things
of fifty years ago than those of yesterday. So, before hand and mind
fail me altogether, I will set on record all I call mind of those
memorable days that closed so black after that bloody York Assize. And
if to any reader I should seem garrulous or egotistical, be it
remembered in excuse that I can only tell the tale as I now recall it,
and that I write of things I saw and things I knew, and of doings I took
part in. I risked my own neck, and had the good fortune to escape with
my life, and with honour, too, which not all who escaped whole and safe
could say. When I was a boy, in the last days of the past century, our
folk lived at Lower Holme, above Slaithwaite, in the old homestead in
which my father's father and his father before him had lived. We were
tenants of my Lord Dartmouth. The house is still there, and when I close
my eyes of an evening, before the fire and my pipe goes out as I sit
thinking, I can see the old place yet, as I knew it in my boyhood's
days. My father, William Bamforth--Bill o' Ben's--was a manufacturer,
a small manufacturer we should say now; but no one thought of calling
him a small manufacturer in those days. He was as big as most men
thereabouts. He bought his wool of the stapler at Huddersfield--old Abe
Hirst;--it was scoured and dyed in the vats in the farmyard; my mother
and my cousin Mary, and Martha, the servant lass, that cleaned the house
and milked the cows, and kept my mother's mind on the rack and her
tongue on the clack from morning till night, helped with the spinning.
The warping and the weaving we did at home in the long upper chamber. We
had four looms at home, and, moreover, we put our work out to the
neighbours. It was a busy house you may be sure, what with the milking
and the churning, and the calves, and the pigs, and the poultry, and the
people coming for milk, and the men coming for their warps, and the
constant work at the old hand-looms in the long, low chamber above, with
its windows stretched right across the front to catch the precious
light. What stir, too, there used to be when father and I set off for
the fairs at Nottingham and Macclesfield and Newcastle, for all those
markets did Bill o' Ben's attend regular as the almanac itself. There
was the loading, overnight, of the great covered waggon with the pieces
of good linsey, and here and there a piece of broadcloth for the clergy
and the better classes, and the grooming and shoeing of "Old Bess," the
stout grey mare. Then the start at early dawn, with the first lark in
summer, in the starlight of the winter mornings. Oh! it was grand in the
summer across the moors, when the roads were plain to see, and only the
crusted ruts to jolt our bones; but in the dark mornings of November,
when the wind howled about the waggon's arch, and the rain beat like
pellets about the tarpaulin, and the waggon wheels sunk deep in slush,
and in the set winter-time, when the roads were lost in snow, it was
cruel work for man and beast. It was gamesome, too, at the slimmer
statutes at Nottingham and Macclesfield, when I had nothing to do but
stand at the stall in the market-place and cut the suit-lengths for the
customers, or carry their parcels to their inns. And grand it was to see
the men servants and the buxom country lasses at the hiring, making
their half-yearly holiday, and spending their money right cheerfully. My
father had an old connection, and scarce ever had to return with pieces
unsold. Then, when the fair was over, and he sat in the parlour of the
Angel at Nottingham, or the Swan at Macclesfield, smoking his long,
"churchwarden" and drinking gin and water, I would off into the town to
see the booths, and the actors, and the giants, and the fat women, and
the dwarfs and two-headed monsters, and many other curiosities that may
not now be seen. I used to sit for hours in the winter nights at home
telling Mary of the bearded woman, and the hen with five legs, and the
learned pig, but of the country lasses, whose cheeks were so rosy and
lips so ripe, she cared not to hear.

The times were bad for most people, but at home we did not feel the
pinch very much. We had the cows and the poultry and the pigs, and
though oatmeal was terribly dear, twenty shillings the hoop, I never
knew what it was to miss the oatmeal porridge and the abundant milk for
breakfast and bacon and potatoes for dinner. On Sundays we nearly always
had beef or mutton and Yorkshire pudding, and my mother's home-brewed
was famous throughout all the country side. Mr. Wilson, the parson of
the church, always called when he came to Holme, though my father had
grieved him sore by taking a pew at Powle Moor Chapel, and sitting under
that godly man, Abraham Webster; and Mr. Wilson always declared to my
mother's own face that her home-brewed was better drinking than any to
be got even at the Black Bull Inn, at Kitchen Fold, which boasted the
best "tap" outside Huddersfield itself. Sometimes on Sundays, too, my
mother had a guests' tea-drinking, and then we had buttered tea-cakes
and eggs, and salad, and tea, and out were brought the silver cream jug
and silver sugar tongs and spoons and the little fluted china cups and
saucers, with little, pink primroses on them, that belonged to my great
aunt, Betty Garside. The women-folk drank tea, but not so much, I think,
that they liked it, for they had not the chance of getting used to it,
but because the quality drank it, and it served to establish their rank
and dignity. My father would never touch it, and I can't say I was ever
partial to it myself. So you see we were not so badly-off at home. My
father's custom lay mainly in the country market towns, and the high
price of corn caused by the ceaseless wars kept squire and farmer in
rich content, and they paid for their cloth like men. It was the
manufacturers who had made and relied on a foreign market for their
goods, who cursed Napoleon, and cursed, too, our own Government, that
was ever at daggers drawn with him. Why could we not let the French rule
their country their own way they said. What was it to us whether king or
Directory or Emperor ruled in France? My father was a Whig, and swore by
Mr. Fox; yet I think at first he was not sorry to see our corn so high,
prices so good, and money so plentiful among the farmers. But in time
the war told on all of us, our ships could not sail the seas, the mills
and warehouses groaned with piled-up merchandise, and the pieces fetched
so little, it was scarce worth while to cart our goods from town to
town. Then every manufacturer in the West Riding called for peace, and,
in time, peace at any price.

I think it was at Nottingham, in the back-end of 1811, I first saw any
signs of a stir because of the new machinery. A man was shot at
Bullwell, near that town, when trying to get at some new
stocking-frames, I saw his body brought into the town on a stretcher by
two constables I can see his eyes and open mouth, with the yellow teeth,
and the tongue thrust out between them, and blood trickling down the
sides of his chin and his hands, the fingers of one wide outspread, the
other gripping tight some grass and sand he had clutched, and his right
knee drawn up so rigid they could not stretch the body, and he was
buried in a chest. They laid him on a table in the tap-room of the first
inn they came to, and I saw him through the window. When we rode home to
Slaithwaite, I remember my father was very silent, and would not talk
about the new machinery, but I was soon to hear enough of it.

I remember, as tho' it were yesterday, one winter's night about that
time, my father was sat by the fire-side, smoking his pipe and taking a
thoughtful pull at times at the yellow pewter pot from which he drank
his ale; my mother in her rocking-chair knitting a pair of long, grey
stockings for myself. I was reading by the candle-light a copy of Mr.
Thomas Paine's "Rights of Man," which I had bought at Nottingham, and
which, despite the groanings of Mr. Webster, our pastor at Powle Moor, I
found a very sound and proper book, as, indeed, I still maintain it to
be; and Mary was looking at the prints in Mr. Miller's Scripture
History, with lives of the most celebrated Apostles, and wondering for
the hundredth time how it came about that the frontispiece exhibits
Father Adam with a full beard, whilst the very next print depicts him,
after the fall, with a chin as smooth as an egg: for there is no mention
of razors in the Garden of Eden. Martha was down in the village at a
prayer-meeting; and Siah, the teamer, had had his porridge and his pint
and had gone to bed. We could hear him, through the rafters, snoring in
the room above. It must have been a Tuesday, for father had been to
Huddersfield to market, and had come home, as he always did on
market-days, more talkative than his wont.

"Aw rode as far as th' Warrener, wi' Horsfall, o' Ottiwell," I heard my
father say. "He could talk o' nowt but th' new machines 'at he's bahn to
put i' Ottiwells. He's bahn, to ha' all his wark done under his own
roof, he says. He's sick o' croppers an' their ways. An', he says, too,
'at it 'll noan be long afore there 'll be a new kind o' loom 'at 'll
run ommost by itsen, an' pieces 'll come dahn to next to nowt. He says
time's noan so far off when th' old hand-loom weavers 'll go dahn their
own slot."

"How long did you stop at th' Warrener?" asked my mother, who had her
own way of putting a point.

"Tha' means it wor th' ale were talking; but tha's mista'en. He meant it
every word. An' he said, 'at them 'at lagged behind mun go to th' wall,
an' he, for one, meant movin' wi' th' times. Him an' Enoch Taylor's
mighty thick, an' Taylor's putting th' new machinery into Bradley Mills,
and Vickerman's. All th' market's talkin' on it. Aw called at th' Pack
Horse----".

"I warrant yo' did," observed my mother.

"At th' Pack Horse," proceeded my father, superior to innuendo, "an'
Horsfall wor there, an' he said 'at th' era o' manual labour wor over,
an' th' triumph o' mechanic art had come. These were his very words. Aw
thowt aw'd remember them to tell, yo'."

"An' little aw thank yo' for yo'r trouble, William Bamforth," observed
my mother, "for that nor any other o' your fine tales from th' Pack
Horse. Little it seems yo', or Horsfall either, dandering about th' Pack
Horse after th' market's done, an' me toiling my blood to water to make
both ends tie. Th' triumph o' mechanic art, indeed! Triumph o'
fiddlesticks. Th' hand-loom's done well enough for thee, an' for thi
father afore thee, an' where would you put yo' new machines if yo' got
'em, I'd like to know."

"Ther's that bit o' money lying idle at Ingham's, an' we could build on
th' Intack, an' ther's a fine run o' water, as Horsfall says it's a sin
an' a shame to see running to waste, an' ther's that fortune of your
Aunt Betty's, at's out at mortgage wi' Lawyer Blackburn."

"Aye, an' there it 'll stop for me," cried my mother, "let well alone,
says I. Wasn't tha tellin' me only th' other neet' o' that poor man at
Nottingham, 'at our Ben couldn't sleep o' neets for seein' him starin'
'at him? Dost tha want bringing home on a shutter, an' me lonely enough
as it is, what wi' thee an' Ben settin' off nearly every week, an' when
yo'r back stopping at th' Pack Horse every Tuesday till it's a wonder a
decent man an' a deacon isn't ashamed to be seen coming up th' broo.
I'll ha' na building wi' my brass. There's enough to follow as it is,
an' that girl, Martha, that soft as she thinks every man as says 'It's a
fine day,' means puttin' t' spurrins in, and na, nowt 'll do but havin'
th' masons and th' joiners all ovver th' place, an' them so fond o'
drink too. Aw'm moithered to death as it is, an' 'll ha' none on't, so
tha' may put that maggot aat o' thi yed, William Bamforth."

"But Mr. Chew says"....

Now Mr. Chew was our new vicar, Mr. Wilson being not long dead.

"Oh, Mr. Chew. It 'ad seem him better if he washed th' powder out o' his
own yed i'stead o' puttin' stuff an' nonsense into other folks!"

"If yo mun talk your own business ovver wi' all th' countryside why
can't you go to Mr. Webster, as is well known to ha' more o' th' root o'
th' matter in him than all th' clergy, an him a weaver hissen, too."

"Why, and so I will," exclaimed my father, rising to wind up the clock,
a solemn act that, in our house, served, except on Sundays, instead of
family prayers, and sent us all to bed.

The very next Lord's Day my father and mother, Mary, and myself, with
Martha and 'Siah, must go to Powle Moor in the afternoon to hear a
discourse by Mr. Webster, my father and I walking side by side, a thing
which I liked not so much as to walk with Mary. But it chanced that on
this very Sabbath my father explained to me what I had often pondered
upon, why we should trudge a good two miles across the moor by a rude
footpath to the Baptist Meeting House, when the Church lay on a broad
and good road almost at our feet, and we had there a large pew, our own
freehold, which had been used aforetime by my grandfather and my
great-grandfather. Whatever the reason was it had not been apprehended
by our old collie, for such is the sway of long habit, that every Sunday
when the cracked bell chimed for morning service at the church, it would
rise from the hearth, yawn, and stretch itself, look about it as though
enquiringly and reproachfully, and then sedately descending the hill,
would enter the church, walk decorously to the old pew, now generally
empty, and stretch itself by the door, in the aisle. Nor, I confess, was
I much wiser than the old dog, for my father's explanation of our
desertion of the church of our fathers. "You see, Ben," he said to me,
when pressed on the point, speaking slowly, for he breathed with some
difficulty in our way up the hill,--"you see, blood is thicker than
water."

Now this is a truth there is no gainsaying.

"And I shall allus hold," continued my father, "I shall allus hold 'at
Parson Wilson had no reight to stir th' magistrates up to refuse th'
license to th' 'Silent Woman' because some o' th' Baptists 'at belonged
to th' Nook Chapel used to go theer o' wet neets to sing an' pray an'
expound for mutual edification, an' if one or two on 'em did happen tak'
too mich ale at times, it's well known talkin's dry wark. Then about
them hens o' your mother's half-cousin, Sammy Sutcliffe, Sam-o'-Sall's.
Tha' knows it were agin all natur' for Parson Wilson to gi' it in as he
did, an' it were but nateral we should side wi' our own kin."

Now it was about these hens I wished to learn, for it was because of
them that it has ever been said that schism was hatched in
Slaithwaite--that th' dissenters layed away like Hannah Garside's hens,
and had laid away ever since.

"Yo' see it wor this way," explained my father, "Hannah were allus a
very fractious woman, more particular as, do what she would, could never
get wed, an' such drop o' th'milk o' human kindness as God had ge'en her
to start wi' seemed to ha' soured on her. Her an' Sam-o'-Sall's lived
neighbour, an' it were like enough 'at her hens strayed into Sammy's
fowd, and into th' shippon too. Hens is like other folk, they'll go'
wheer they're best off, an' if Hannah threw th' fowls nowt but bacon
swards yo' needn't blame 'em if they went wheer they could get out o'
th' reach o' her tongue an' a grain of meal an' corn as weel. Onyway she
pulled Sammy up afore Parson Wilson for th' eggs, an' Parson Wilson gave
it agen yor' mother's cousin. An' what I say is," said my father,
pausing to' get his breath, and striking his stick into the ground by
way of emphasis, "What I say is, there's no swearin' to eggs. Moreovver
Hannah gloried ovver th' decision to that extent it wer' more nor flesh
an' blood could bear, an' when she cam' an' set i' church, reight i' th'
front o' yor' aunt, wi' a Easter egg fastened i' her bonnet, Sammy saw
no way for peace but to join th' Baptists. An', as I said afore, blood's
thicker nor water, an' yor' mother an' me havin' prayed on it, and yor'
aunt sayin' beside 'at no money o' hers, an' it's well known she's tidy
well off, should ever go to th' Erastian idolators, our duty seemed
clear both to yo'r mother an' misen. Not but what aw liked th' owd
Parson well enough, tho' he wer' a Tory, an me a Whig."

We were by this time in the road that strikes across the top of the hill
towards Salendine Nook, and by the side of which the Powle Moor Chapel
was built, with the house and outbuildings for the minister. We could
see the men quitting the burial ground and the little public-house
hard by, and, all in their Sunday clothes, folk were coming from every
part for the afternoon service, not hurrying, and with no air of
business, but solemnly and seriously, talking little, and with thoughts,
like their faces, set Zion-wards. When we exchanged greetings, as we did
with most, it was in grave tones, for it was not counted decent in my
young days to be over cheerful on the Sabbath Day. And tho' as I have
said, we at home had not felt the pinch of the hard times more than we
could bear, there were few there so well off. Most that went to th'
Powle were hand-loom weavers, with here an' there a little shop-keeper,
and tho' meal was neither so bad nor so dear as it had been in Barley
time, nor work so scarce as it became later, yet most knew the pressure
of want, and the shadow of worse things still to come seemed to brood
over us all.

It was a sight to see Powle Chapel at an afternoon service. Every pew
was filled, and every eye was fixed on Parson Webster as he gave out the
hymns line by line, verse by verse, for few of us could read, tho' most
made a point of having a hymn book. Up in the loft was the music, the
double bass, the viol, and the clarionet. Between Jim Wood--Jim o'
Slack--who played the double bass, and his colleagues of the viol and
clarionet contention had raged from the very foundation of the church at
Powle. Jim o' Slack maintained that in every true view of harmony wedded
to divinity, the notes of the double bass stood for the wrath of
Jehovah, and were designed to inspire awe and inward quaking. The feeble
and futile utterances of the viol and the clarionet, he conceded, might
represent the tender qualities of mercy and compassion, and, as such,
might be worthy of some consideration among the Methodies, whose
spiritual food was as milk for babies, but in High Calvinism, Jim
maintained, nought but the bulky instrument his soul loved could convey
adequate conception of the majesty of God and the terrors of hell. It
was grand to hear the singing. We all sang for our lives, and we all had
a notion of singing in tune. Then the praying! oh! it was fine to hear
little Parson Webster. How he rejoiced over the elect! How he lamented
over the unregenerate! It was very comforting to hear, for we were the
elect, the Erastians of the Church and the Arminians of the chapel in
the valley we well understood to be those in outer darkness. With what a
solid satisfaction, too, did the elders settle down to the discourse of
an hour and forty minutes by the hour glass, which was the least we
expected from Mr. Webster. I remember still his text of that very day,
"Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me."
Who could deny, he asked, the utter and natural depravity of man? Why
only he who by the very denial stood confessed of the sins of arrogancy
and self-sufficiency. Was not the natural man, since the Fall, prone to
murder, lust, evil imaginings, covetousness, hardness of heart, vain
glory, malice, and all unworthiness, all being, by nature, the children
of wrath, and only that small handful of the dust of Zion, of all that
great valley, called forth and justified before the foundation of the
world that we should be holy and without blame before Him in love. How
awful, too, was the lot of those that went down quick into hell, whose
steps took hold on the eternal fire whose flames were never quenched.
But we were not of these, tho' on this we must not plume ourselves, for
salvation was not of him that willeth nor of him that runneth, but of
God that sheweth mercy, for the potter had power over the clay, of the
same lump to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour. I
was very glad for my part to have been made a vessel unto honour, and of
this there could be no reasonable doubt, for when my father, moved
thereto by my mother, after the split about Hannah Garside's eggs,
finally asked for admission to the community of the Powle and was
dipped, cousin Mary and I were required to state on which side we
elected to stand. Mr. Webster, in a long and earnest discourse in the
parlour at home, and with much praying, set before us, as he said, life
and good, death and evil, blessing and cursing. I waited to hear what
Mary had to say, being for my part little troubled in my mind at that
time about religion and not rightly understanding on what points of
doctrine Mr. Chew differed from Mr. Webster, and liking the chapel the
better because the singing was heartier, and the Church the rather
because the sermons were shorter, and it seemed to me your soul might be
saved there with less pother. Now Mary, I know not why, said she should
go with her aunt, and was commended for a good girl by Mr. Webster, and
I, not wishful on the Sunday to turn down the broo' to Church whilst
Mary toiled up the hill to the Powle, announced my resolve to walk in my
father's steps. So Mr. Webster, much pleased, praised my filial
obedience, and he being well content to take this as a sign of grace and
effectual calling, I e'en took his word for it and joined the Baptists.

I say I remember well the text of that afternoon, and by this reason.
My father and mother and Mary were set in the one pew whilst 'Siah and
Martha and myself were set behind them. Now as I looked upon Mary that
afternoon it came into my mind very strongly that it was strange so fair
and dainty a specimen of the potter's craft should be shapen in
iniquity, and I was marvelling greatly to myself that out of the same
lump of clay two vessels so unlike as Cousin Mary, and Martha, our
serving wench, should be fashioned by the potter's hands. For Martha was
broad shouldered and squat, and had coarse towzelled hair, very red, and
her mouth was large and her lips thick, and her arms were rough of skin
and red, and she waddled in her walk, and her breathing was heavy, and
her eye dull, and her voice was not tuneful, tho' she would sing in the
hymns, albeit my mother frowned at her and would have had her hold her
peace, for my mother did not think it quite proper for the serving man
and maid to sing with their betters: but as my father said "If you go to
chapel, you must do as chapel does."

But Mary, oh! my children, you will never know what my cousin Mary was
like in those days, with her brown eyes, so warm and soft, and her brown
hair all wavy, and with little love ringlets about the neck and her
little hands not white but creamy brown, and her rosebud mouth, and her
voice so musical, and her smile so sweet. And so, I say, thinking,
perhaps, too much of these things, and wondering, too, at the marvellous
skill of the potter, and opining, belike, that there must be a
difference in the clay, but quite certain that Mary was not fashioned in
iniquity, and the day being hot and the air very heavy, and two suet
dumplings I had eaten for dinner sitting heavy on me, I fell into a sort
of doze as Mr. Webster reached his twelfthly. Now, Mary, seeing this,
and being ever full of mischief, having looked to see that my father was
intent on the discourse, and that my mother's eyes were closed--in
thought--did lean over the pew and put into my mouth a lump of
good-stuff and, I chancing at the moment to throw back my head, the
sweet rolled into my gullet and had gone nigh to choke me. I had much
ado to stifle my coughing, and all the congregation did look hard at me,
save only Mary herself, who listened with sweet gravity as Mr. Webster
proceeded with his twelfthly.

I walked home that evening with 'Siah, for Mary dallied behind with
Martha, and father and mother had gone on before with Mr. Webster, who
was to take his supper at our house, as was now his almost weekly custom
of a Sunday. 'Siah was a silent man, and was a good servant, loving his
beasts and careful for them, but over fond of ale, and much to be feared
when overtaken with drink, and noted that he had fought a great fight at
the Feast with one arm tied behind his back.

"Aw believe awn getten it, Ben," said 'Siah, as we went across the
fields in the wintry gloom, homewards.

"What's ta getten, 'Si?" I asked.

"Th' conviction," said 'Siah.

"Conviction, what conviction?"

"Why, th' conviction o' sin to be sure. How many convictions does ta'
think there are?" said 'Siah, in a pet.

"Why, 'Siah, th' last conviction tha' had were afore Justice Ratcliffe
at th' Brigg, and more by token if my father hadn't sent me wi' th'
fine, in th' stocks tha'd ha sat for six mortal hours by Huddersfield
Church clock."

"That were a different sort o' conviction all together, Ben, that were
for feightin', and this aw mean naa is th' conviction o' sin."

"Well, fighting's a sin," I said.

"Aw dooan't know as it is--not if it be for feightin' such a thing as
th' ostler at th' Pack Horse for sayin' Martha's bow-legged, when aw
know better, but aw do believe at aw gat my conviction o' sin much i'
t' same way."

"How does ta' mean, 'Siah," I asked, for I saw our teamer was in deadly
earnest.

"Why, bi wrastlin', to be sure. So th' missis munnot tell me agean
there's no gooid i' wrastlin'. It were after aw came back fra th'
village last neet. Aw leets o' Martha an 'oo gav' me a bit o' her tongue
for makkin' a swill tub o' mysen an' for lettin' a little chap like th'
ostler at th' Pack Horse ha' th' law on me, an' so aw went into th'
shippon an' set by mi' sen for happen two hours i' th' hay at aw'd
pulled for th' beasts. An' aw said to mi' sen 'at it were no use tryin'
to be good for aw were clear born to be damned. Aw could ha' ta'en that
hop o' mi thumb at th' Pack Horse awmost atween mi finger an' thumb an'
pinched him i' two if it hadn't been at aw were mazed i' drink. An' so
th' text com' into mi head at aw wer reight served for mi fuddlin' an'
'auv made up mi mind to just pay him aat next time aw goa to market, an'
then awst turn religious an' happen gi' up drinking, except at th' Feast
an' Christmas time, an' mebbe when aw get treated an' at a chersenin' or
a weddin' or a wake, an' mebbe occasional o' a Saterday, not to lose th'
taste an' feel on it, an' i' th' way o' dooty as yo' may say."

This was the longest speech I ever heard 'Siah deliver. I thought his
resolution a good one, only advising him when he brought the matter off
with the man at the Pack Horse to be sure to make his opponent touch a
button so as to have law on his side, and if possible to have witnesses
that could be relied on to speak the truth, I mean, so as to make it a
case of what lawyer Blackburn called provocation.

It was after supper that the momentous consultation about the machines
began. Full justice had been done to that evening meal. There had been
cold beef and a chine, oatcakes that had been dried on the creel over
the big fireplace before which a bullock might have been roasted whole,
cheese and apple pie, and, to drink, a quart or more of my mother's
famous home brewed. Mr. Webster, by grace of his office, was privileged
to drink his ale out of the large two-handled silver flagon, a hundred
years old at the least, that no common lips had ever touched. I do not
think the supper was the worse for that we took it in the house instead
of the parlour. There was the sanded floor to our feet and the smoked
rafters above, and in the sill of the long diamond paned windows were
red earth pots of geranium and musk and fuschia, that made the room
smell sweet as a nosegay. The spinning wheels were away in the corner, a
list hearthrug made by my mother's own hands stretched before the grate,
a cushion whose covering worked by the same tireless fingers imaged the
meeting of Jacob and Rebecca at the well, adorned the long oak settle
under the window. The walls, washed yellow, were relieved by the framed
funeral cards of departed relatives; the calf bound family Bible
containing entries of births, marriages and deaths for many generations
back, my own birth being at that time last entry of all, tho' there have
been added a goodly list since then, reposed on the chest; a celery
glass, highly cut, on the one side and a decanter on the other. A
beautiful enamelled tray, with hand-painted roses, was reared behind,
and best pictures of all, my father always vowed, and richest ornaments
of any room, a prime flitch of bacon and two sturdy hams hung on the
hooks near the door, so as to catch the air to keep them sweet. I have
been in many a fine room since then, notably when I went to Woodsome
Hall to see my Lord Dartmouth and give the tenants' greeting to his
bonnie bride; but for real home feeling and snug comfort never have I
seen ought to compare with the old house at Holme when it was tidied up
for Sunday.

Supper was over. Mr. Webster was sat in my father's arm chair, his
little legs, with their worsted stockings, hardly reaching the ground,
and I make no doubt he would have been more comfortable on the settle,
which was lower; but it was a point of civility with my father to
surrender the master's chair to an honoured guest. A long churchwarden
sent its reek up the broad chimney, and a little glass of weak gin and
water stood by the parson's right hand convenient on the table. Not that
Mr. Webster took much of either ale or strong waters; but this was
Sunday, and it is well known that when a minister has preached two
sermons, with many a long prayer thrown in, to say nothing of hymns,
sing he never so badly, his throat must needs be dry. My father sat
opposite Mr. Webster on the other side of the hearth, my mother, in her
low rocking chair with the iron rockers, swaying gently to and fro, and
fingering her handkerchief for lack of her knitting needles, which must
not be used on Sundays. The case reserved, as a lawyer might say, had
been put by my father with much aiding and commentary from the mother,
who justified her interruption, under a look of remonstrance from both
pastor and lord, by saying that a woman could jump over a wall while a
man was going round and round seeking for the gate.

"It is no small matter, friend Bamforth," at length said Mr. Webster,
"and one that I doubt not you have taken to the Lord in prayer. Well
pleased too am I that you have seen fit to take counsel with me in this
weighty business. For it is laid upon me to feed the sheep of our
Master's fold, and tho' you would not look to me for the bread that
perisheth, but rather I to you, for it is written that the labourer is
worthy of his hire, and ye may not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the
corn, yet perchance in doubtful and perplexing times a pastor's counsel
may be the more needful nourishment. Now I would have you take heed
against the besetting sin of this latter-day and corrupt generation,
which I take to be that very making haste to be rich against which the
Book doth expressly warn us. You speak of building a mill for these new
methods. Hast thou not thought within thyself, like the man in the
parable, saying 'What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow
my fruits? This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater;
and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods.' And mark what to
that man God said: 'Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of
thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided? So is
he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.' And
now I ask you, brother Bamforth, can you be rich toward God, if you
build up your fortune on the ruin of your fellow men. You say one o'
these new finishing frames will do the work of four, may be of six men.
Aye, also is there talk of looms that shall need neither skill nor care.
It may be true, I know not. But oh! it will be a sore day for this
hillside, and all the country round when that day shall be. What is to
become of those who now keep a decent roof over their heads, and tho'
times be bad can still give bit and sup to wife and bairns. You may make
new machines but you cannot make new men to order. And see to it that it
be not now with thee as in the days of Pharaoh of old, when Aaron's rod
swallowed up the rods of the wise men and the sorcerers, and thy rod too
be swallowed up. If that came to pass of which I have read and heard,
there will be no room in this valley for men of but moderate means. Yo'
may build a mill, but bigger men will build bigger mills, and the bigger
mills will swallow up the less, and thou and thy son, and even Mary
yonder may be fain, thou in thy old age and they in their prime, to take
wage at another's hand, and to do a hireling's task in another's mill."

"If I do may I be--"

"William," said my mother, before my father could conclude, and we could
only guess what awful doom my father was about to invoke upon himself.
But enough had been said. Whether the mind of our household's head were
the more moved by the picture of his friends and neighbours reduced to
want, or by the picture of himself and his working for others, who had
always puts out work ourselves, I know not; but from that day forth
there was no more thought for many a long day of any change in the ways
we had used of old, and, for the new machines, my mother died in the
belief that the curse of Scripture was upon them.



CHAPTER II.

IT WAS not often my father missed the Audit Dinner at the Dartmouth
Arms, but for some reason I do not remember, he could not go to the
November Audit of 1811. So I went in his place, as was but my due,
seeing that in the course of time and nature the homestead would be
mine, and I tenant to my lord in my father's stead. So to the dinner I
went in great state and no little fluster, having donned my Sunday
clothes, and showing as fine a leg (though I say it that should not) as
ever passed Slaithwaite Church. I went by the churchyard corner where
old Mr. Meeke rested in his grave, and I did not fail to doff my beaver,
for was I not taught all I ever knew at the Free School, founded by Mr.
Meeke, and I was, too, ever a lover of the Church, though we had joined
the Hard-bedders. There had been a wedding that day, and I should have
been there, but none were invited save only family friends, owing to
times being so bad. Jack o' Jamie's had wed Sue Lumb, and I knew Jack o'
Jamie's and Sue both, as indeed I knew every mother's son and lass in
Slaithwaite; and my mother could tell their pedigree for generations
back. Opposite the door of the Dartmouth Arms I came across a crowd
different from ordinary, for in the midst was Jack donned in his Sunday
best, and a great white rosette at his breast, and there was Sue with a
white veil over her head and clinging to Jack's arm and crying and
coaxing, and Jack fuming and swearing and waving his arms and shaking
his fist at his own father. Sure a rare sight for a wedding day, and I
stayed to hear what might be the meaning of it all. I knew Jack for a
decent, hard working lad that kept his father, a drunken neer-do-weel,
from the rates. Old Jamie had a hang-dog look to be sure, as he kept
away from his son's reach and cowered behind his new daughter-in-law.

"It's too bad," Jack was crying, "It's too bad; yo' all know 'at awn
kept mi father awmost even sin' aw could addle a meg, an' him doing nowt
but tidy th' house up an' go a rattin' with th' dog an' happen bring a
rabbit home betimes--an' aw never grudged him owt, for he's mi own
father, an' mi mother 'at's dead an' gone left him to me. But, its too
bad aw say--gise 'ang, it ud make a worm turn--here its mi wedding
day, an' aw thowt we'd have a bite an' sup by ordinar. So aw off to Ned
o' Bill's an' bowt three p'und o' good wheat flour, tho' it's well
known, what price it's at, an' ill aw could spare th' brass. But a felly
doesn't get wed every day. We calc'lated it ud mak ten cakes, an' that
ud be one round apiece an' two to put bye for Sunday. Mi father baked
'em hissen three days sin', for we thowt we munnot eit 'em till they
were stale, new uns crumble so--an' aw bowt a piece of th' skirt o'
beef at lay me in five good shillin'--so when aw set off to take Sue
here to th' chuch aw left mi father to watch th' beef afore t' fire, an'
we borrowed some plates an' knives an' forks an' three chairs, for aw
thowt we'd all have a feast at 'ud make th' weddin' party remember mi
weddin' day as long as they lived. An' after th' knot wer' teed an' we
were walkin' th' village so all could see what a lass awd gotten, we
just looked in at th' house door to see if th' meat were nearly
done--an would yo' believe it, th' owd glutton 'ud supped welly a
gallon o' th' weddin' ale an' were wipin' his chops wi t' back o' his
coat sleeve, 'at weren't his own, but borrowed o' mi uncle Ben; an'
ther' were nobbut four cakes left an' a good p'und cut off th' joint an'
th' pan as bare o' gravy as if it had been new scoured. Oh! tha' brussen
guts; if tha' weren't mi own father!" And here Jack shook his fist over
Jamie's head, and Sue tried to turn aside his wrath and to play the
peace-maker, as a good woman ever will.

"For shame o' thissen," said one; "It 'ud sarve thi reight to put thee
i' th' stocks," said another; "Let's stang him," a woman cried. "Many a
decent body's been cucked for less," said Moll o' Stuarts, who knew what
the cucking stool meant full well. And all felt that Jamie Thewlis had
done as scurvy a trick as ever he had done in a scurvy life. Even those
that drank with him, the loafers and vagabonds of the village, got to
the outskirts of the crowd, and left him alone to his defence.

"Yo' see it were this way," said Thewlis, when he could get a hearing.
"Th' table' wor set all ready for th' weddin' party. Aw'd laid a clean
cloth on th' table. There were a plate an' a knife an' fork for every
one that were comin'. Th' house were tidied up an' as clean yo' could
had etten yor dinner off th' floor. Then Jack started off to fetch
Susan. Th' cakes were on th' table, one bi each plate. Aw put th' joint
on th' jack afore th' fire just as he'd told me bi th' clock. Then aw
set me dahn to watch it. It wor a grand joint. Aw could ha' fair hugged
it when aw took it up, so plump an' red and firm, wi' streaks o' fat
runnin' in an' among th' lean like rivers o' cream in a bank o'
strawberries. Th' fire were just reight, banked down an' hot, an' aw
ca-ered me dahn first o' one side o' th' hearth an' then on t' other,
an' began to watch th' hands o' t' clock an' wish it wor dinner time.
Dinner time it were bi reights, but we'd put th' dinner back so's Jim
an' his frien's could walk through th' village. Then th' skin o' th'
joint began to crack, an' th' fat to fizzle an' ooze 'aat an spit. Aw
looked at th' clock. Aw'll swear th' han's hedn't moved for
half-an-hour, an' yet it were tickin' reg'lar--aw nivver felt hauf as
hungry i' mi life afore. Aw'd had no breakfas', for awd said to mi sen
it 'ud nivver do to shame yar Jack's weddin' dinner bi not doin' reight
bi it. Then all at once th' jack gay' a click an' summut splurted aat,
an' all at once there wer' a smell at fair made mi belly leap inside me.
But aw'd promised yar Jack at aw'd do fair--so aw went to th'
cellar-head to see if ther' wer' happen a crust or owt to stay mi
innards, but ther' wer' nowt. Then ther' wer' another click, an' another
spurt, an' th' room wer' fair full o' th' smell. It awmost turned me
dizzy. Aw looked at th' clock agen, an' guise 'ang me, if th' hand had
stirred aboon an inch, an' dinner seemed as far off as ivver. Then aw
thowt awd fetch th' ale. So aw got th' jug an' a milkin' can an' started
off to th' Globe. Aw tried hard to strap a gill, but th' owd skin-flint
wouldn't trust me. Aw'd awmost talked her into it when t' thowt cam'
into mi head at happen one o' th' naybors 'at hedn't bin axed to th'
weddin' might be after th' joint; an' aw span home as fast as aw could
for fear o' spillin'. Then when aw oppened th' door ther' war' a fair
blast o' th' smell o' gravy right i' mi face. It just took mi breath
away, an' aw had to tak' a pull at th' jug to steady misen. That
heartened me up a bit, an' aw just took one o' th' cakes, mi own at wer'
to be an' set i' my own place at th' table, so it were no robbery,--an
aw put it i' th' pan under th' meat; an', by gow, it wer' a sop an'
gradely. Aw think aw mun ha' put too much salt on it, for aw felt as dry
as a lime-kiln. Then aw had another swig at th' jug, an' looked aat for
th' weddin', but aw could see no' signs on 'em. Then aw bethowt me at
th' fiddler were' nobbut a little un, an' could mak' hauf a cake do, so
aw made hauf a sop. Then th' gravy began to run red an' brown into th'
pan, an' ow knew th' meat wer' near enuff--an' still ther' wer' no
signs o' anybody. Howsomever, aw thought my share shouldn't be spoiled
for any tomfoolery such as walkin' th' village wi' a lass o' my arm, as
if yo' couldn't do that ony time. So aw just cut a slice aat an' put it
on a shive an et it o' mi knee, an' had a swallow out o' th' piggin' to
make it equal wi' th' jug. Then aw thowt aw meight as well be hanged for
a sheep as a lamb, an' aw ate mi fill. Tha' ma' poise me, Jack, if tha'
likes, but tha'll noan poise th' meat out o' me, that's one comfort.
It's th' first time for six months 'at mi back an' mi belly ha' not
shakken hands, an' aw'll ta' thi poisin', an' thank yo' for it."

But long before Jamie had done his story he was out of danger of a
hiding. There was not one there that did not feel hungry with the very
story, and the party trudged homewards with a laugh and a cheer to make
out as best they could on what was left--Jamie, forgiven and
impenitent, not last in the joking throng.

The partition of the upper story of the Dartmouth Arms had been removed,
and thereby room was made for the poorer tenantry who came this year in
great numbers, many there being who came to plead the hard times and
escape their remit, but joined in the rude scramble for the thick slices
of meat and bread and the brimming pewters that were their yearly gift
from the lord. But in the long room, on the top floor, was more decent
seeming and good manners; for the tenants of the larger holdings at that
time paid to the host of the inn each man eighteenpence that there might
be a well-spread board. Mr. Joseph Scott, who lived at Woodsome (none of
my lord's family being then in residence), did sit at the head of the
table, and gave us the health of the king, which we drank with a good
will, for there was none that did not grieve for the old man so sore
stricken in his latter days. Then did Mr. Scott call upon us to toast
His Royal Highness, the Prince Regent, and many did drink the health
with a hip, hip, hurrah but for my part, though I hate to waste good
liquor, I poured my ale into the spitoon, for stories not a few had come
to our ears of the wild doings of the Prince and of his cruel treatment
of his consort. Mr. Fox, to be sure, and other leaders of the Whigs in
Parliament, did excuse the wildness of the Prince, and some did even
bear a railing tongue against the hapless princess; but for me, who am
perhaps too little learned to judge of princes and courts, I deemed such
naughtiness should not be in high places more than in men of less
degree, and my loyalty went into the sawdust. But I took a double
draughty to the health of my lord and his lady.

There was no lack of subjects for our tongues to wag upon when the ale
had loosed them, and a well-lined waist set the oil of gladness on our
faces. There was, for one, the never failing theme of Lord Wellington's
doings among the Dons. But a few days previous, General Marmont had
raised the siege of Ciudad Rodrigo, and our spirits had been greatly
stirred by the discovery of one of his dispatches, in which he boasted
that he would have pursued the British forces to the lines of Lisbon "if
the moment designed for the catastrophe of England had arrived." That
put our English up, and was as good as a score of recruiting sergeants
to our army. Catastrophe, we knew well, might come to us as it has done
to other nations; but never, we vowed, should or could it come through a
frog-eating Frenchman. We gladly turned from that topic to news nearer
home. There was the great fight at Thissleton Gap, for instance, which
showed what British grit and muscle and pluck could do; and we were all
ready to wager all we had that if you searched France from north to
south you could find no champion like Crib, who had near been the death
of Molineux in a fight near Grantham, breaking his jaw, and leaving him
senseless on the field. There had not been a bed to be had for love or
money for twenty miles round Thissleton Gap the night before the fight,
said the "Leeds Mercury," and all the nobility and gentry of the county
had been there; and after his great victory Crib, carrying away a purse
of 400, had driven to London in a carriage and four, the postillions
decked with blue ribands and streamers, and the whole populace in every
town and hamlet by the way turning out to cheer the wearer of the belt.
Then, too, there was much talk of the progress making with the cutting
of the new canal that was to tie the eastern and the western seas; and
we had not yet done marvelling at the boring of the waterway under
Stanedge. Then, again, we must gossip to one another anent that strange
portent of the skies, the wondrous comet, that still made our early
morns so beautiful and yet so fraught with dread. The wise men said its
tail was over twenty million miles long, as it streamed away from
Charles's Wain across the distant sky, and Mr. Mellor, the schoolmaster,
did try to show me how the calculation had been made; whilst Mr. Varley,
of the corn mill, who had a merry wit, did say that coals would soon be
cheaper, for the Welsh were counting on the comet coming so near, they
might toast their cheese by it. Mr. Mellor was somewhat ruffled that his
serious discourse should be turned to levity, and said that as perchance
Mr. Varley could not be expected to understand the deep subtleties of
astronomy, he would try him on a subject nearer his heart.

"I will, to-morrow," said Mr. Mellor, "bring to your house twenty golden
guineas, and in return you shall give me your written bond to give me
therefor, one grain of good wheat, two grains and no more on the day
following, four on the next, and so on each day thereafter for six
months by the calendar, every day doubling the number of the day
before."

"Done, and done to it," cried Mr. Varley, and all the company exclaimed
that so rare a bargain the miller never made in his life before and for
an hour after that I saw Mr. Varley was doing sums in his head, and
chuckling feebly to himself but in time he ceased to laugh, and his brow
wrinkled and his eye was anxious, and he was seen to add figures
secretly in his bulky pocket-book, and ever as he worked he grew sadder;
till at length he cried that not all the corn that grew that year in
Yorkshire could pay his wager, and he was fain to fill our measures
round with best ale to be quit of his bargain. And all that went away
sober that night told their wives how the schoolmaster had bested the
miller, and were the more resolved their lads should mind their books
and be good at figuring. And I was very glad that my old master had come
off with so great credit, for Mr. Varley, by reason of being the lord's
agent, was something prone to give himself an air.

But Mr. Webster was not too pleased that Mr. Varley should have jested
of the comet. It had exercised him sore in the searching of the
Scriptures, and oftentimes had he pointed to its presence in the
heavens, and many a restless night had he given to my mother.

Mr. Webster would have it that the comet did foretell the coming of the
Son of Man in a cloud with power and great glory, and the good man
rejoiced thereat, seeing nought to cause us grief, but rather joy, that
there were "great earthquakes in divers places, and famines and
pestilences, and fearful sights and great signs from heaven." And he
would exultingly call us to witness the fulfilment of prophesy for that
there were signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars, and upon
the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves
roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear and for looking after those
things which were coming on earth. But my mother lived to laugh at her
fears, and even to wear a dress that became the fashion, of which the
body was of pale red silk, a star of gold thread standing for the
comet's head, and a fan shaped tail of silver spangles spreading out in
likeness of the comet's tail.

It was my great honour after the dinner, and whilst the company sat over
their cups, to be invited to the head of the table by Mr. Joseph Scott,
of Woodsome, who was then lately become a magistrate, a handsome man of
some forty years. He asked most kindly after the health of my father and
mother, and bade the tapster who waited on the upper end of the table
charge me a bumper of the wine of Oporto, which did fill my heart with a
great warmth. Then when I would have returned to my seat by the
schoolmaster he bade me remain, and I listened with all my ears to the
talk of my betters. I noticed that Mr. Scott spoke mostly with Mr.
William Horsfall, of Marsden. I knew Mr. Horsfall well by sight, having
seen him often on the road as he went to or returned from market, a man
in his prime, with a keen, resolute look; not easily turned from his
purpose, I warrant you. Impatient of opposition, I judged him even then,
brusque, and a little petulant, but not unkindly of heart as I had
heard, for those that worked for him had ever a good name for him--but
a masterful man.

The talk between these two was much of the coolness there then was
between America and England. Mr. Horsfall was very bitter about this.
"It is all the fault of those accursed Orders in Council," he said.
"Before our benighted Government issued the Orders in Council, America
took twelve million pounds worth of our manufactures--now not one
penny-worth. Withdraw the Orders and you conciliate America; you bind
her to us by the closest tie of all, the tie of self-interest. So long
as these Orders remain in force it is futile to talk of negotiations. It
is beating the air. We are alienating our own flesh and blood, we are
running grave risk of having another enemy on our hands, and that of our
own household, our cousins if not our brothers. Here are we pulling our
own nose to spite Napoleon's face. It is suicidal, it is
criminal!"--and I know not how many other hard names Mr. Horsfall
hurled at the poor Government whilst Mr. Scott, with the ink scarce dry
on his commission, fidgetted in his seat and was, I thought, hard put to
it to defend the Government. At last when Mr. Horsfall grew more
vehement in his denunciation of ministers, Mr. Scott bade him remember
that it was the Whigs who in January, 1807, issued the first
counterblast to Napoleon's Berlin Decree; and then did these two
Englishmen, the one a Whig and the other a Tory, get so warm about
Whiggery and Toryism that I had much to do to get to the truth of the
matter. In a lull of the storm I did so far presume upon the great
condescension that Mr. Scott had shewn to me, for my father's sake, as
to ask him what these same Orders in Council might be, and how they bore
upon us humble folk in Slaithwaite, for save that every one did speak of
them as the cause of much of our bad trade and sore distress, I knew
little for certain about them. "You must know then," explained Mr.
Scott, "that in 1806 Napoleon issued from Berlin a proclamation,
addressed to all the world, declaring the island of Great Britain in a
state of blockade, all British subjects, wherever found, prisoners of
war, and all British goods, wherever taken, lawful prize, and excluding
from all the ports of France every vessel which had touched at any
British port, no matter to what nation such vessel might belong."----

"But surely, sir," I said timidly, for I knew little of such great
matters, "surely, that was to declare war on all the countries of the
world."

"'Rem acu tetigisti'--thou hast touched the point with a pin," cried
Mr. Mellor, who had drawn near, whereat I blushed mightily, for I knew a
little of the Latin, thank to much persistence of my good dominie, and
by this time all the company had ceased their jesting and coffing and
idle gossip, and all ears were cocked to hear what Mr. Scott and our
neighbour Horsfall were so hot about.

"Then did the Whig Government," continued Mr. Scott, triumphantly,
"issue an Order in Council, declaring that England was authorized by the
Berlin Decree to blockade the whole seaboard of France; to prohibit all
vessels which had touched at a French port from entering our harbours,
and making their cargoes fair prize. It was that Order which estranged
America, and has made it so that all our foreign trade has been cut off
as with a knife."

"Nay but," said Mr. Horsfall, "you should not forget to say that Mr.
Percival, your Tory minister, has not only continued the Order but
extended it; that the Whigs have admitted the error of their policy,
that petition after petition has gone from the manufacturers of
Yorkshire, praying for a Repeal of the Order's, and that Mr. Brougham is
never weary striving for that good end. But we know how it is--the war
may ruin us manufacturers, but it pays the landowner. It keeps up the
price of corn and stock, it finds pay and promotion for the young bloods
of the aristocracy, it distracts the minds of the people at home from
domestic reforms, it keeps up the hideous system of privilege, by which
peer and prelate batten on the spoils of a people oppressed to the
limits of endurance, and it is mighty convenient to keep Napoleon as a
bogy man to frighten the people withal when they cry for reform." And
then did these two good men at it again hammer and tongs, and others
joined in, and the ale and the wine talked louder than sense and
knowledge, and you could make neither head nor tail of all the talk. But
presently they simmered down, and Mr. Horsfall was drinking to the
health of Mrs. Scott, whom he vowed he knew when she was the beauty of
Storthes Hall, as if nothing had come between them to raise a dust, and
all the more that, as good chance would have it, they hit on a subject
on which they had little variance.

"I hear," said Mr. Scott, "that you are trying these new finishing
frames of the Taylor's, at Ottiwell's."

"I am that," said Mr. Horsfall, "and well content I am with them. They
finish the cloth better far than the best croppers ever did or could,
and one machine can do the work of four men."

"Then you will need less men," said Mr. Scott, "and this is no time to
be sacking men--I remember what happened twenty years ago when
Grimshaw, of Manchester, arranged with Dr. Cartwright, the new Bishop
Blaize as they called him, to set up four hundred looms at Manchester to
be run by a steam engine. Grimshaw received hundreds of threatening
letters, he was fired at more than once, his wife nearly fell into a
decline from constant fear, and just when the mill was built, for four
hundred looms, and part of the machines were in, mill and looms and all
were swallowed up in a fire, and who made the fire you may well guess.
It ruined Grimshaw, and now he goes about saying he wishes Bishop Blaize
had been in blazes 'fore ever he had tempted him with his fine stories.
But you Whigs will never be content with the wisdom of our forefathers.
You must have something new fangled, either in mill or state"--and so
they off again into politics; and having promised my mother to be home
by milking time, and fearful if I stayed longer the fumes of the tobacco
and the wine would be too much for an unseasoned head, I took my leave
of Mr. Scott and won my way into the open air.

By the stepping-stones that crossed the river, who should I see but
Soldier Jack and a merry party that had been out with the harriers. They
had come trooping down Kitchen Fold from over Crosland Moor way, and
were in high feather, shouting and singing, while the hounds bayed in
chorus. Soldier Jack was no man's lad, a bye-blow. He had been left on
the Workhouse steps tied in a bundle, and nought to show who was his
father or who his mother. Then when he was a lad of ten years old the
Overseer had 'prenticed him out to a shoemaker in Huddersfield, but he
had been a sore trial to his master--disappearing and appearing when he
liked, and neither fair words nor the strap, of which his master was not
sparing if Jack spoke truth, availing to make him follow the old adage
and stick to the last. Then one fine day the recruiting sergeant, in all
his bravery, had put up at the Rose and Crown, and called on all gallant
lads to take the king's shilling and fight for glory and their country.
"That's the colour for me to dye," thought Jack, and braving the law,
which would have laid him by the heels for breaking his writings, he
'listed in a foot regiment, and was off for the wars with a heart as
light as the heels he showed his master. Then many a year passed. Jack
was unseen and forgotten in the haunts of his youth, when lo! he
appeared, from God knows where, straight as a picking rod, brown as a
berry, minus the left arm, and with a limp of his right leg; but
otherwise sound as a bell and tight as a drum. He had some money, in the
coinage of all the countries of Europe well nigh; and, as I heard tell,
right royally did Jack live while his money lasted. He had no fixed
quarters in the early days of his return from the wars, but of recent
years he had dwelt much among the Burn Platters, an uncanny race of
outlaws that some said were Frenchmen and some said were gypsies, that
lived at Burn Platts on the moors on the edge of Slaithwaite, and of
whose savagery and evil ways many stories were told. But Soldier Jack
ever kept himself spruce and trim, and was a welcome visitor at every
house on all that country side. How he lived none did know for gospel.
At times in his cups he talked mysteriously of golden crosses and rare
stones that he had lighted on in the sack of holy houses in Spain; but
this, I think, was mere embroidery of his adventures. Lord! what a life
had been Soldier Jack's--what sieges he had seen, what pitched battles
he had fought in, what prisoners he had taken, what forlorn hopes he had
led, what distressed damsels he had rescued, how many haughty hidalgos
he had slain with his own hand! Even Lord Wellington himself had been
under obligation to him, and he had all but seized with his own hands
the awful person of Napoleon himself. How he lived I say I know not.
Belike he had some small pension from the king. At haymaking time, too,
he turned a good cock and an honest penny, despite his one arm. He never
missed a market or a fair, could be trusted above the common to carry a
message, and was something of a farrier. But set job he had none, and
yet never wanted. To be sure he had free quarters in nigh every hostelry
all the country round, and if truth were told could hang up his hat when
he would, for good and all, at the Black Bull; for widow Walker, who
kept that house, was known to be widowing, and a fair and buxom dame
withal.

Now on this night of the Rent Audit Soldier Jack was pleased to leave
the hunters and walk homewards with me, though his comrades were
clamorous for him to join them in another bout at the ale. Though times
were never so bad, it went hard with the weavers if they could not leave
their shuttles and follow the hounds; and somehow they had ever
wherewith to guzzle at the inn. But Jack was maybe wearied with the
trail, and we took our way past the church and up the hill towards Holm.
For some short distance Jack walked with never a word, though I wanted
news of the hunt, where they had killed, and whose hound showed the
truer scent. Then without prelude Jack began.

"Ben, I want a word with thee. You and me has ever been friends, and
your mother, God bless her, ever the soft word and the open hand. And
yo'r father, a good man, though over hard on the slips o' youth"--now
Jack was forty if a week--"But there are things brewing it is right yo'
should know on; for them tha's 'kin to yo' are like to be tangled in
em."

"Whatever do yo' mean, Jack?" I asked, trying to speer at him in the
gloom, for I thought maybe the ale had got into his head.

"There's a deal o' sufferin' about these parts, Ben. More nor yo' think
on. Yo' happen think 'at because th' lads about are after th' hounds an'
have a bit to spend on drink 'at they're better off nor they are. But
yo' see I'm more about nor yo' an' more intimate like. Folk is sellin'
their bits o' stuff quiet like. Mony a decent woman 'at wouldn't have it
known has sent me wi' 'owd keepsakes an' heirlooms like to th'
silversmith i' Huddersfelt an' Owdham. They put a brave face on it an'
talk little, but aw know there's scores o' fam'lies i' this valley and
on these hill sides, 'at's welly clammin'! It isn't them as goes 'afore
the overseers 'at's the worst off. There's scores an' scores livin' on
the town 'at go reg'lar every week for th' town 'lowance. They'n got th'
length o' th' ovverseer's foot, an' its not for the like o' me to blame
'em."

"Crows shouldn't pike crows' 'een, eh Jack?" I put in.

"Th' ovverseer's fair game," continued Jack, unmoved. "But he's a fool
for all his stuck up ways. Aw tell yo' 'at there's hundreds awmost
sucking their finger ends, like bears do their paws, 'at winnot go on to
th' parish. An' mark yo', th' poor ha' borne wi' slack work an'
mullocked on as best they could, as long as they thought th' wars and
bad harvests were to blame. An' they've bided in hope, for harvests
winnot all be bad, an' we'st beat the little Corporal yet. But now th'
mesters are for makin' bad worse wi' this new machinery. They're crying
'Every man for hissen an' devil take the hindmost.' They're bringing
wood and iron to do the work of willing hands and arms, an', by gow, the
lads about won't see their craft ruined, an' them an' theirs pined to
death, wi'out a blow struck. Aw tell yo', Ben, there's mischief brewin',
or my name's not Soldier Jack; an' if yo' want to know more, yo' mun ask
yon mettlesome cousin o' yours, Judd Mellor, o' th' Brigg."--

"What! George Mellor?" I cried; "why, what has he to do with it?" For
such an ending to the soldier's tale I never thought nor dreamed of.

"I've said my say, Ben, and yo'll get no more out o' me. It's no use
pumpin' at a dry well tha' knows. So aw'll say good neet, an' my duty to
thi father an' mother." And resisting my entreaty that he would go
onwards to our house and take pot luck at supper, Jack wheeled off into
the dark, and I heard his stride, firm and martial still, despite the
gamey leg, as he made across a footpath to the left, and his voice
humming a stave of Lillibulero.



CHAPTER III.

IT WAS the Christmas Eve of 1811, a night beautiful, bright and clear.
The moon was high in the heavens, and a myriad stars gemmed the sky.
Flakes of snow fell gently, like the lighting of grasshoppers, but not
so thick as to cloud the air. It was cold, but not bitterly cold. The
snow crunched cheerfully under your feet, the hedges were rather frosted
than cumbered; but the wild waste of hill all around and above
Slaithwaite was white with a coverlet smoothed as with careful hands.
The little homesteads on the hillsides stood out stark and black on the
pale setting, their slender lights of lamp or candle declaring that many
this night waked, who every other night in the year went to bed with the
sun. We sat in the house, kitchen you would call it now--all our
household save only 'Siah, who, we made no doubt, was faithful to his
yearly custom of honouring Christmas by getting more ale than was good
for him. Only a candle burned on the table, but the fire was piled high,
and cast a lurid light about the room, the yule log saved from last
year's fire blazing bravely. My father was fidgeting and looking at the
clock. He would have rather been in bed. We had had our supper, but a
great currant loaf and a round of cheese was on the table, and the
biggest pitcher of all our ware was ready for Martha to fill from the
barrel in the cellar, when the right moment should come. Mother and Mary
had speculated, and wondered and then wondered again as to whether the
Church singers would this year sing a verse or two by our door. My
mother argued they would not, as a mark of reprobation for our joining
the Baptists. Mary, who knew that the hearts of the young men of a
choir, church or chapel, are not in the keeping of vicar or minister,
had her own reasons for maintaining a contrary view. My father stoutly
declared he did not care a brass farthing one way or another. Meat and
drink and five good shillings were waiting them, he said, and if they
were fools enough to turn up their noses at good victuals and good
brass, that was their look out, not his. All the same we all knew he
would have felt it keenly that our house should be passed over for the
first time within the memory of any of us. Then came the further
problem--which set would be likely to reach us first, the church, who
must sing first at the Vicarage and Dr. Dean's, and at Sammy Sykes's,
who was churchwarden; or the waits from Powle Moor, who had further to
come and a rougher way. Anyhow we hoped devoutly the two parties would
not arrive together. We could hear, in the still night, the sound of
music in the air, sad and wistful, floating among the hills. However we
should soon be out of doubt, for midnight was hard upon us.

The old clock warned the hour with a staggering click, and its clear
metallic voice had rung out but six of the twelve hours, when we heard a
footfall on the carpet of snow in the yard. There was no murmur of
voices, none of the hawking and tuning and chuntering of a band of lads
and lasses, but right out upon the still air, firm, strong and deep
baritone, as from a singer well set up and fearless, music of itself,
and with instrument neither of string nor reed to back it, came the
grand old words and tune, like which no other words and tune do ever
stir my heart--

  "Christians awake! Salute the happy morn,
   Whereon the Saviour of Mankind was born.
   Rise to adore the mystery of love
   Which hosts of angels chanted from above;
   With them the joyful tidings first begun
   Of God Incarnate and the Virgin's Son."

And then again--

  "Of God Incarnate and the Virgin's Son."

Who could it be? Some lone wanderer surely that had stolen a march on
church and chapel alike.

"It's happen 'Siah," hazarded Martha. No 'Siah had a voice like a frog.

"It's th' sexton," said my father.

Now the sexton was sixty years old, with a piping treble, and the voice
of our midnight visitor was rounded, full and mellow.

I looked to Mary for a hazard, for no thought of who it could be came
to my mind, and I was not best pleased that anyone should outstrip the
choirs. And as I looked the voice without took up another strain.

  "Then to the watchful shepherds it was told
   Who heard the Angelic herald's voice 'Behold.'"

And Mary's face was a sight to see. She had dropped her knitting on
her lap, and her hands were crossed over the work, and her face was as
though the morning sun shone on it, and a soft smile was on her parted
lips, a look half-glad, half sorry, was in her eyes and her bosom
seemed to flutter.

"It's George," she said, very softly, "George Mellor, fra' th' Brigg."

And then came a thundering knock at the door, and my father rose to open
it right heartily, and in came my cousin, George Mellor, with a great
red muffler round his neck, and his coat all flaked with snow, and his
short brown beard and moustache wet with half-melted flakes; now
stamping his feet and now kicking them against the door-post, and
bringing with him a gust of cold air and a sprinkling of tiny feathery
sprays that whisked in at his back.

"A merry Christmas to you, Uncle William, and a happy New Year." "And to
you, aunt, with my mother's love." This with a hearty smacking kiss.
"And to you, Mary, and here's a Christmas Box for you," and I thought
George would have kissed Mary too, but she was away to the other side of
the table.

And so all round, with a noble smack at Martha's lips, Martha being
nothing loth, and giving kiss for kiss with a good will that set us all
laughing. "A right proper lad is George Mellor, and knows how to win a
lass," I heard Martha tell 'Siah afterwards, when she was rating him by
way of curing his aching head.

And a right proper man George Mellor was. Six feet by the stick, and
with shoulders well back, and strong, firm, warm hands that gripped you
to make you tingle. His eyes were brown and full of fire, and dark
auburn hair curled close upon a rounded head. He had a temper, if you
like, but he never bore malice, and I never knew him do or say a mean
thing, and if he was at times unjust he was quick to make amends. He was
a prime favourite of my mother. Her own sister was George Mellor's
mother. His father was dead, and my Aunt Mellor, to my mother's surprise
and indignation, had married John Wood, of Longroyd Bridge, a cloth
finisher, in middle life, somewhat younger than my aunt, and a man it
was hard to like. Whatever could have possessed my aunt capped us all.
She had a bit of money of her own, and could have pulled along in a
middling way without a second marriage. But my father said, "You mun
wait till yo're a widow yoursen, if yo want to know what makes a widdow
get wed again." Anyhow Aunt Matty had a hard time of it, for John Wood
was a hard man, cold-blooded and spiteful. He soon found out that he
could hurt his wife through George, and he always seemed to rub George
the wrong way. The lad ran away once, and none of us knew what became of
him till long afterwards, not even his own mother, who nigh fretted
herself into her grave over him. But he turned up again as suddenly as
he had vanished, taller, stouter, firmer set, quieter. John Wood thought
his spirit was broken, made him so quiet. But he found out his mistake
when he began to slur at him.

"See here, John Wood," George had said, for he would never call him
father, "I have come back home for my mother's sake, because it was made
clear to me my place was by her side. I will work for you, and do my
duty by you, and I will pay you fair for my board and ask no favour of
you as man or lodger. But you must speak me fair, and treat my mother
kindly, or you'll rue the day you ever crossed George Mellor." He had a
quiet way with him when he was most roused, a sort of cold heat, had
George; though over what you would have thought concerned him least, he
would flare up and flush, and his eye would blaze and out his words
would come like a pent-up torrent. I never feared George when he was in
a temper, but it was dangerous to cross him when his cheek and lips
paled and his words came soft and slow.

"Aw walked up th' cut side," he explained. "It seemed an age since aw
saw yo' all; an' our house's none too cheerful just now. Trade's fearful
bad, an' John Wood's as sore as a boil--an' I bowt this sprig o'
mistletoe of a hawker for yo' to hang on th' bowk, an' who' should let
you Christmas in if not your own nevvy, Aunt Bamforth."

"Sakes alive, aw nivvir thowt on it," cried my mother all of a sudden.
"Ben, whip outside this minnit--doesn't ta see George's hair is awmost
red an' it's black for luck--whatever could'st ta be thinking' on,
George?" And so nothing must do but I must step outside and enter with
due Christmas greetings, to cross the luck, and the waits from Powle
Moor arriving at the very nick of time, we all went in together; and
Mary and George and myself were soon busy enough handing round the
cheese and cake and ale.

George and I slept together that night, and next morning, we all, save
my mother and Martha, who must stop at home to cook the dinner, went to
church, for we wouldn't for anything have missed hearing the Christmas
hymn; and near all Slaithwaite was there, Methodie and Baptists and all;
and even folk that went nowhere, Owenwites they called them, made a
point of going to church that one morning of the year. They said it was
to give them an appetite for the beef and plum pudding; but I think it
was more by way of keeping up a sort of nodding acquaintance with what
they felt they might have to fall back on after all, for you may ever
notice that the parson treads very close on the heels of the doctor.

Now after dinner my father must needs have a glass of hot spirits and
water, and presently was fast asleep in his chair, and I would have been
glad to have done likewise, for I was not used to sitting up half the
night, and had dozed off more than once in church, only to be roused
with a start by a nudge from Mary. But George was all for a walk over
Stanedge to stretch his legs and get a mouthful of home-fed air after
the foul smells of the town. I thought Mary pouted a bit, and asked her
to go with us, but she said two were company and three were none, and
George maybe was too fine to walk out with a country lass. I expected
George to disclaim any such slanderous thoughts, but he only laughed and
said something about the wind being too nipping for the roses on Mary's
cheeks. So off we two set towards Marsden at a good swinging pace. When
we had dropped down into the village, and were thinking of calling at
the Red Lion to get a glass of ale and a snack, whom should we come on
but Mr. Horsfall, of Marsden.

"What, Ben, lad!" he said to me heartily and shaking my hand most
warmly--"A right good Christmas to you, and my compliments to my good
friends at Holme." A pleasant man was Mr. Horsfall when he liked, but
one you must not lightly sour or cross. He had an iron hand, folk said,
but he kept it gloved.

"And who's your friend, Ben?"

I made George known to him, and Mr. Horsfall could tell him of knowing
his mother, my aunt, when she was a blithe young girl courting with my
uncle Mellor that was dead. But what surprised me was that George,
generally so cheery and ready to meet civility more than half-way,
seemed to freeze up and would scarce give his hand in greeting to Mr.
Horsfall.

"It'll be cold on the top, Ben," said Mr. Horsfall. "Come along to
Ottiwells and taste our spiced ale. My wife will be glad to have a crack
with yau, and it'll be cozier by th' fireside nor ovver th' top I'll
warrant you."

My own good will went with this invitation, for I got enough and to
spare of Stanedge in my business rounds; but George hung back strangely,
and Mr. Horsfall, not used to have his advances coldly met, ceased to
press us, and with awkward apologies on my part, and a curt nod from
George, we went our several ways.

"I wonder you can speak civil to a man like yond," said George, when we
had our faces straight set to climb the hill.

"Name o' wonder, why, George?" I asked, thinking nothing but that some
private quarrel must have sprung up, of which I knew nothing, but ready
enough to side with George, for in my young days families stood by each
other, right or wrong.

"Don't you know that Horsfall is foremost of all in pressing on the use
of the new machines? Don't you know that he has put them into Ottiwells?
Don't you know he is sacking the old hands and will have none but young
'uns that will and can learn, for it isn't all that will that can, how
to work the new frames? Don't you know that there's many a family in
Marsden now, this very merry Christmas that we're wishing each other
like prating parrots, that has scarce a fire in the grate or a scrap of
meat on the table, or warm clothing to the back, just because of
Horsfall and such as he? Don't you know that in Huddersfleld Market
Horsfall has sworn hanging isn't good enough for the Nottingham lads? If
you don't know, you live with your eyes shut, Ben, and your ears waxed,
for aw'll never believe 'at your heart's shut, lad. And then you ask me
why I couldn't take him hearty by the hand."

"But what does it matter to thee, George?" I asked, wondering at his
warmth and hardly keeping pace with him as he strode on in his
excitement.

"It matters nowt to me in a sense, Ben, and yet it matters all to me. I
suppose th' upshot would be that John Wood might as well shut up shop,
and little I'd care for that. John Wood's cake's baked, and if it
warn't, there's enough for my mother 'bout his brass. But it's not o'
Wood nor myself I'm thinking, Ben, and I don't take it too kindly you
should look at it that way. I tell you, Ben, there's hundreds o' men and
women and wee helpless bairns that's just clemming to death. Yo, don't
see as much of it up i' Slowit nor on th' hill sides, though it's war
there nor yo happen think. And now th' mesters are for doing th' work o'
men an' women too wi' cunning contrivances that will make arms and legs
o' no use, and water and steam in time will do the work that Natur'
intended to be done by good honest muscle."

"Aw think yo' exaggerate, George," I said. "A little saving o' manual
labour here an' there's one thing, th' displacement o' human agency
altogether's what yo' prophesy."

"Aw've no patience wi' thee, Ben. Tha' cannot see farther nor thi own
nose end. Aw tell yo unless the toilers of England rise and strike for
their rights, there'll soon be neither rights nor toilers. Aw've looked
into this thing further nor you, an' aw can see th' signs o' th' times.
Th' tendency's all one way. There'll soon be no room for poor men in
this country. Its part of a system aw tell yo'. There's a conspiracy on
foot to improve and improve till th' working man that has nowt but his
hands and his craft to feed him and his childer, will be improved off
th' face o' creation. Aw've been reading aw tell you, an' aw've been
listening an' aw've been seeing, an' aw've been thinking; an' what aw've
read an' what aw've seen has burned into my soul. The natural rights of
man are not thowt of in this country, th' unnatural rights o' property
ha' swallowed 'em up. It's all property, property."

"Nay, George, yo're riding yo'r high horse again," I said; but I
couldn't help admiring him, for he spoke well, and his face was all lit
up with the glow of intellect and passion.

"It's God's truth aw'm speaking, Ben, and pity o't it 'tis true, as th'
player says. What is it keeps folk so poor? Bad trade. What is it keeps
trade so bad? Th' wars. Allus wars. For twenty years it's been war and
war to it. What are we fighting for, I ask you?"

"To keep Boney out o' England," I said very promptly.

"Nowt o' th' sort, Ben--that's a bogey to frighten babbie's wi'--Boney
axed nowt better nor to be friends wi' England. Th' French ha' more
sense nor us. They saw all th' good things o' this life were grasped by
th' nobles an' th' priests. They saw it were better to be born a beast
of the field than a man child. They saw that the people made wealth by
their toil; and the seigneurs, that's lords, and the church enjoyed the
wealth they made, only leaving them bare enough to keep body and soul
together. Aye, they're careful enough not to kill the goose that lays
the golden eggs. That is, sometimes. Time's they over do it. But a
trodden worm will turn, an' they turned in France. They sent their proud
lords and ladies packing.

"To the guillotine," I interposed.

"Packing, I say, and the fat parsons, faithless shepherds of an
abandoned flock, packing with them. Then the people begin to put things
to rights."

"And a pretty mess they made of it," I put in. "But all the kings and,
emperors in Europe, an' all th' landlords an' all that had got rich by
robbery, an' all th' bishops and clergy, little an' big, hangers on o'
th' aristocrats to a man, took alarm. They thowt their turn would come
next, an' they raised the cry of England in danger. It wasn't the people
of England that wer' fleyed. Not they. They knew well enough nowt could
make them waur off nor they were. Th' war were a put up job of th' king
and th' nobles and th' squires. And who profited by it? The noble and
the squire an' the sleek parson with his tithes. What has made corn as
far beyond the poor man's reach as though a grain of wheat were a ruby
or a pearl? The wars, always the wars. And the people, the thousands
upon thousands of men and women who have no part nor parcel in this war,
save to send their children to die on a gory bed, what voice or what
part have they in all this? The part and the part of sheep driven to the
slaughter"--

"But what has Horsfall to do with all this?" I asked, very naturally I
think.

"He has this to do with it, Ben. Ever since th' bad times began,
Englishmen ha' been told to stand together shoulder to shoulder agen a
common enemy. Th' poor ha' borne their sufferings wi'out much murmuring
as long as they saw th' rich suffer wi' themselves. Patriotism isn't a
rich man's monopoly. Poor folk love th' owd country, though aw wonder
sometimes what they love it for. But now what do we see? These new
machines offer th' masters th' chance o' supplying their customers at a
less cost to theirsen than they ha' done up to now. Aw'll give yo' an
illustration of what aw mean. A lace frame such as they're putting up i'
Nottingham costs 120. They say it'll save the work of four. Th' master
saves in a year more than th' cost o' th' machine. He saves it, but who
loses it? Why th' wage earners to be sure. And that's what they call
standing shoulder to shoulder. Aw call it deserting your comrade and
leaving him to shift for his-sen. Th' 'Leeds Mercury' only last week
said there were twenty thousand stocking-makers out of employment in
Nottingham, and yo' may judge for yersen what that means."

"But what can yo' do, George? Yo' cannot fight agen th' law o' th' land.
Th' masters ha' th' law at their backs--yo'll nobbut get yersen into
trouble. It's waur nor kickin' agen th' pricks. Yo' surely wi'not ha'
ought to do wi' machine breaking. That'll nobbut land thee i' towzer,
an' happen waur nor towzer."

"It isn't towzer 'll stop me, Ben. Aw'm groping i' th' dark just now.
Frame breaking and rick burning seems but spiteful work, but it is
action, and action of some sort seems called for. If we submit like dumb
cattle, our rulers say we are content and have no grievances; if we
assemble in great numbers and proclaim our wrongs they hang us for
sedition. What can we do, where shall we turn? Aw cannot see daylight
which ever way aw turn."

"Cannot yo' let things bide, George? Happen things 'll shape theirsen.
It's little such as us can do to mend things. If tha' were Lord
Dartmouth na', tha' might do some good. But aw can see nowt but trouble
for thee i' me'lling i' this wark, and what hurts thee tha' knows well
will hurt me, George."

"Aw know that, Ben. And aw've more reason nor ever o' late for keeping
out o' trouble. Is there ought between thee and Mary, Ben?"

"What, our Mary?" I asked, bewildered, somewhat by so sudden a change of
subject, and not seeing the working of George's mind.

"Aye, your Mary," said George.

"What does ta' want to know for, George?" I asked; and I tried to ask as
though I cared little for the answer, and yet I knew, all of a flash
like, what the answer would be, and that somehow, and why I could scarce
even myself say to myself, the answer would make me wince.

"Because, George, if ever aw wed, your Mary will be the lass."

"Yo'll happen ask her first," I said, nettled.

"P'raps tha's axed her already?"

"Tha' knows very well aw hannot, Ben. It only came into my head last
neet when 'oo were singing 'Wild Shepherds.' 'Oo's a sweet voice, an'
th' way she looks when 'oo sings makes yo' think a bit o' heaven's
opened up, an' th' light inside is shinin' right down on her
face--hasn't ta' noticed it, Ben?"

"Mary's ower young for courtin'," I said.

"But tha' hasn't told me, Ben, is there owt between yo' and her? But
there cannot be. Tha'd ha' told me if there wor. Besides she's too near
o' kin to thee an' browt up i' th' same house too. She'll be more sister
like to thee, Ben, aw reckon. But is there owt?"

"Nay there's nowt, George. She's thine to win an' to wear for me. But
'oo's ovver young for courtin', George. An' if yo'r for our Mary, tha'
mun put all thowts out o' thi yed but stickin' to work an' makin' her a
good home. And that reminds me. It 'ad welly slipt mi mind. Soldier Jack
was hinting summat t'other day. Tha' are'nt keeping owt back fra' me,
are ta, George?"

"Can aw trust thee, Ben?"

"Tha' knows that best thissen, George." We had reached the very crest of
Stanedge, and were looking down upon the Diggle side and over towards
Pots an' Pans an' where the road leads to St. Chad's and winds round
towards what is now called Bills o' Jack's. We came to a stand by common
impulse. George stood right anent me.

"Can aw trust thee, Ben," he asked again, and looked at me as though he
would search my very heart.

"Tha' knows best thissen," I replied once more; for I should have
thought to lower myself by protesting to him who had been my dearest,
almost my only friend, since we were boys together.

"With my life, Ben," he said very solemnly, and took my hand.

And then George told me something of what was afoot in Huddersfield.
Steps were to be taken, he said, to dissuade the manufacturers from
ousting manual labour in any of the various processes of the making and
finishing of cloth, by the use of machinery. For this purpose the men
were to bind themselves by solemn oath neither to work the new machines
nor to work in any shop or mill into which they might be introduced. No
violence of any sort was to be employed either against man or machine,
at least not if the masters proved amenable to reason; and of that
George thought there could be little question. "They cannot stand
against us, if we are united," said George; "our weakness lies in action
unconcerted and without method. If we set our faces resolutely against
the use of these new fangled substitutes for human labour, we can at
least compel the masters to wait till times are better and trade mends.
It may be that when the wars are over and the market calls for a larger
and a quicker output, machinery may be gradually introduced without
hardship to those who have grown old in the old methods and who cannot
use themselves to new ways. Meantime we shall have learned the secret
and the value of combination and we may turn our organization to the
protection and the improvement of the worker and to the wresting of
those rights that are now withheld."

Now to this I could see no mariner of objection, and partly from
curiosity, partly because my blood had been fired by George's words, but
much more because it was George who urged it, I promised to attend a
meeting of some of George's friends who were' like-minded with himself;
and promised too, though not so readily, to keep my own counsel about
what he had talked on.

The early evening of winter was falling, and we turned homewards. We did
not speak much. My cousin was deep in thoughts of his own, and I, too,
had enough to ponder on. I did not half like my new departure. I was not
much of a politician, and had always thought my part in public affairs
would be to ride to York once in a while and vote for the Whigs as my
father had done before me. As for setting the world straight, I had no
ambition that way. In time I had no doubt I should be either a deacon at
the Powle or a churchwarden at the church, and probably constable of the
manor if I thrived. To make fair goods, to sell them at a fair price, to
live in peace with my neighbours, and in time to marry, such was the sum
of my ambition.

And that sent my mind in a bound to Mary. The house would look strange
and lonesome without Mary. I should miss her saucy greeting of a
morning; I should miss her gentle bantering, the sunshine of her sweet
face and the music of her voice. The more I tried to think of the old
place without Mary, the less I liked the picture. And when I tried to
console myself with thinking that there were as good fish in the sea as
ever came out of it, I failed dismally.

When we reached home keen set for tea, there was the table laid all
ready, and a scolding too for being late. But I turned away my mother's
wrath by giving her Mr. Horsfall's greetings, and set her talking of him
and his wife and all the family tree. For mother had a rare gift that
way, knowing the relationship by blood and marriage of every family for
miles around, and able, in a way you must hear to believe, to count up
cousinships and half-cousins, and uncles and great uncles, till your
brain turned round. Except my lord's family and the folk at the
vicarage, who had come from the south, I think she made us akin to all
the folk in Slaithwaite, Linthwaite and Lingards. As was natural, George
took but little interest in this intimate pedigree, and about eight
o'clock announced his resolve to take the road to the Brigg. He was
greatly pressed to stay to supper, but would not, much to my mother's
concern, who had a firm persuasion, that town bred lads never got enough
to eat, and cherished a suspicion that George, though as hale and hearty
a youth as ever went on two legs, and one as little likely as any to be
put on, was starved as to his body and broken as to his spirit by his
step-father.

It befell that night, whether by chance or that my mother schemed it so,
that she and I sat up by the fireside after all the others had gone to
bed. My mother had her eternal knitting, and I tried to settle my mind
to a book; but could not, for thinking of matters not on the printed
page. I gave up the effort after a while, and set my mind resolutely to
think on my promise to join the plot against the masters; but all to no
good, for do what I would, my thoughts strayed to what George had said
of Mary, and I liked it less and less. It gave me a turn when my mother
said--

"Mary grows a fine lass and noan ill-favoured, think'st ta, Ben? Not 'at
aw set much store on good looks, for beauty's but skin deep, as is weel
known. But Mary's one 'at 'll wear well, an' keep her looks to th'
last," continued my mother, without waiting for the opinion she had
asked from me. "Aw was just such another misen when yo'r father begun a
courting me."

Now I opened my eyes at this, for it had never occurred to me to think
of my mother as a beauty.

"Not but what there's points in Mary 'at could be mended," went on my
mother serenely. "She's a notion o' keepin' things straight an' tidy,
but 'oo's a bit too finickin' in her ways an' too mindful o' her hair
an' careful o' her hands, an' happen too fond o' colour in her ribbons;
but 'oo'l mend o' that when th' children come. An' she's mebbe too free
o' her tongue."

Oh, mother! mother!

"But that comes o' your father encouragin' her an' laughin' at her
answerin' back, when it would seem her better to hearken to what I have
to say an' be thankful 'oo has a aunt to tak' pains wi' her."

"Aw dunnot doubt 'oo is," I cried.

"An' Mary's noan 'bout brass, an' though awst allus hold 'at it's better
to ha' a fortin' in a wife nor wi' a wife, there's summat i' what th'
owd Quaker said, 'at it wer' just as easy to fall i' love where brass
was as where it wasn't. Ever sin' my sister died, an' Mary wer' left o'
mi hands, her fortin' has been out at interest, an' we'n charged her
nowt for her keep."

"Aw should think not, indeed," I cried, indignant at the very thought.

"There's them 'at would," said my mother tartly.

"We're not o' that breed, aw hope," I said. "Anyways we ha' not, so tha
needn't fluster thissen, though aw'll tell thee, Ben, it's better to be
a bit too keen about brass nor a lump too careless. So Mary 'll ha' more
nor her smock to her back, wed who she will, an' a handy lass in a
house, an' th' best of trainin, as all the country side will tell yo'.
An' for my part, when th' parents is agreeable, an' plenty o' room i'
th' house, an' there's th' spare bedroom, an' we could fit th' lumber
hoil up for th' childer, an' when yo've made up yo'r mind, it's no good
wastin' time; an' Easter'll soon be here, an' aw shouldn't like a
weddin' 'atween Easter an' Whissunday. Tha'd better see what Mary says,
an' aw'll speak to yo'r father afore th' week's out."

"But, mother," I cried, "Mary's nivver given me a thowt that way. Aw'm
sure she just thinks o' me as a brother. Aw shud only fley her an'
happen mak' it uneasy for her to live here, if aw said owt and she
didn't like th' thowts on it."

"Who said she had given thee a thowt that way? Aw sud think she knows
what becomes her better nor to be lettin' her mind things till th' man
speaks. But Mary's a good lass, an' I'll go bail 'oll wed to please them
as brought her up."

"Did yo, mother?" I asked with malice, for my father and mother had been
married at Almondbury out of our parish, taking French leave of her
folk. And as my mother rallied her thoughts for a reply, I made my
escape to bed.



CHAPTER IV.

IN February of 1812, it was borne in upon our minds that something more
than distress and disaffection were in our midst. These we were used to,
and they had come to seem matters of course. It was painful to go to the
Huddersfield Market these days. The old brick rotunda was opened as
usual, and as usual the stalls were piled with cloth. The manufacturers
stood by their wares, or gathered in anxious groupes in the alleys
between the stalls. But buyers were rare, and prices ruinous.
Shop-keepers in the New-street stood on their steps looking for a
customer as eagerly as a becalmed captain for a cap of wind. Round the
old market cross the famished workmen stood sullen and scowling. They
had not much to say. They were too far gone even for anger. Their faces
were now pinched and haggard. If a man had thrown a loaf among them they
would have fought for it. It was said that at that time families had not
twopence a head to live on each day. At the market dinners at the Cherry
Tree and the Pack Horse the manufacturers dined together as usual but it
was doleful work. We sat down to our meat as to funeral cakes.

Bad trade long drawn out had tired the staunchest of us, and there was
not one ray of hope to brighten the outlook. War still dragged on, now a
victory, now a defeat. But we had ceased to look for an issue from our
troubles from the success of our arms. The contest seemed interminable,
and meanwhile banks were breaking, credit was destroyed, old firms were
failing; and men who had struggled on bravely, making goods to stock
rather than close their mills and sack their old hands, saw no choice
but to give up and own themselves beaten. Wheat was eight shillings a
stone, and so bad at that, that it could not be baked; the poor rate was
at twelve shillings in the pound, and worst of all, the poor were
cursing their masters in their hearts and thinking their sufferings lay
at their master's doors.

Now I cannot for my part think such a time was fitting for bringing in
machinery. I know full well that water power and steam power and
improved machinery have been of untold good to the poor; but those who
were to reap the first profit should to my thinking have bided their
time. But Mr. Cartwright, of Rawfold, Mr. Horsfall, of Ottiwells and
some others, seemed callous to the sufferings round them. Perhaps it was
they looked so intently at the distant object, that they could not see
the things at their feet. They were both men impatient of obstacles;
they resented interference; they pooh-poohed those who counselled delay.

In that month of February we had the first news of any violence in our
neighbourhood. Late of a Saturday night a number of men with faces
blacked and their dress disguised, some wearing women's gowns and others
strange hood gear, broke into the dressing shop of Mr. Joseph Hirst, of
Marsh, destroyed the dressing frames, the shears and other furniture of
a gig-mill. The same evil fate befell Mr. James Balderson, of Crosland
Moor, and Mr. William Hinchcliffe, of Leymoor. Then came the soldiers,
the Scots Greys and the Second Dragoon Guards. They were billeted in the
various hostelries of the town at free quarters, and it was not long
before there was much scandal at their carrying on a drinking, swearing
lot of men, a terror to decent girls, reeling on the streets in broad
day with the loose women of the town, singing lewd songs, with no
respect even to the gravest and most dignified magistrates in the town,
paying heed only to their own officers, and that only when on guard or
patrol. They were a bye-word and a reproach in the town, and of no sort
of use at all.

Then, too, did the Head Constable of Huddersfield call upon all men over
seventeen, and under fifty, paying rates to the poor, to enrol
themselves as special constables, and among them was none other than
John Wood, who looked mighty big with his constable's staff, and talked
large to my aunt and George and to me, when I called at the Brigg about
the valiant deeds he would do if ever Luddite fell into his hands. For
by this time the name "Luddite" had crept into the district, how I know
not. And at his step-father's big talk George Mellor smiled grimly.

I say I called at Mr. Wood's house at Longroyd Bridge. I had meant to
have a talk with George about the smashing of the machines of which, and
of nothing but which, the market talk had been. I was not easy in my
mind about the matter. I thought, after my promises to George, it was
but my due to know if he had any share in these doings. But I was let.
My aunt had her ailments to talk of, and burdened me with messages to my
mother. Then Mr. Wood was there whilst we took a dish of tea, and all
his talk was of the dressing the Luds would get. I asked him if he
intended to try the new machines in his own shop, to which, for my
aunt's sake, we sent our own goods to be finished. But I gathered that
my astute uncle deemed it safe to see how the cat jumped before
committing himself. He was ever one for letting others do the fighting,
and then coming softly in and reaping the spoils. So with one thing and
another I got no talk with my cousin, and started off by my lone to walk
to Slaithwaite over Crosland Moor. And near the Brigg itself I came on
Soldier Jack, with a poke slung over his shoulder.

"Bide your time, Ben, and I'll be with you," he cried. "Good company
makes short miles. I've a little errand o' my own to see to on Paddock
Brow. Will ta come as far as th' Nag's Head and drink a glass and tarry
there for me, or will ta company me to th' Brow? I'st noan be long, for
it's not exactly a wedding I'm bahn to."

"Oh, I'll go with you," I said, willingly enough, for Jack was always
well met.

"It's Tom Sykes I'm bahn to see. Yo' dunnot know him belike, a decent
body but shiftless, and a ailing wife and a long family. There's a sight
o' truth in what young Booth was reading to us th' other neet from a
great writer, a Mr. Malthus, 'at a man who is born into a world already
possessed, or if society does not want his labour, has no claim or right
to the smallest portion of food; and, in fact, has no business to be
where he is. At nature's mighty feast there is no cover for him. That's
what you call pheelosophy. I'm bahn to comfort Tom Sykes wi' a bit o'
pheelosophy."

"And is that philosophy you'n got i' your poke, Jack?" I asked "It seems
weighty matter."

"Noa, this is a few crumbs o' arrant nonsense, fra' th' kitchen o' th'
Cherry Tree. Th' cook there's a reight good sort, an' some day or other,
aw don't say but I might--you know. But it's ill puttin' all yo'r eggs
i' one basket. An' gi'ein' a shillin' to th' parson to tie you is a
tighter job nor takin' th' king's shillin'. Yo' can't hop out o' th'
holy estate as aw did aat o' th' army--on a gamey leg. But here we are
at Tom's."

It was a low stone thatched house on the Lower Brow, and overlooked the
river. Jack lifted the latch, and we walked into the living-room. It was
bare of all furniture, save a round deal-topped table, three-legged, a
low rocking chair by an empty fire-grate, a cradle and another,
cane-bottomed chair, on which sat a man in his shirt sleeves, hushing a
wailing child. The man was shock-headed. He had not been shaved for a
week or more. His cheek bones stood out above shrunken cheeks. His eyes
burned with an unnatural fire, and he had a hollow, hacking cough. He
was trying to quiet the child, clumsily but patiently putting sips of a
bluish fluid, milk and water, to its lips, with a crooked broken spoon.
Another child, about seven years old, I judged, with neither clogs nor
socks, all her covering a smock and a short frock scarce to her knees,
was stretched on its face in a corner of the chimney, over a litter of
sacks. And under the sacks lay--a something. We could see the straight
outlines of a figure--I felt what it was, and my heart stood still. But
Jack's eyes were not so young as mine.

"Where's yo'r missus, Tom?" he asked, swinging his bundle on to the
ricketty table. "Th' cook at th' Cherry Tree has sent her a summat. See
here's th' makin's o' a rare brew o' tea, screwed up i' this papper. Aw
carried it i' my weskit pocket, for fear o' accidents. An' there's
broken bread an' moat an'--but what's ta starin' at? Where is 'oo aw
say?"

"'Oo's there, Jack--in th' corner there, under Milly. Yo' needn't fear
to wakken her--'oo sleeps very sound. Gi' my compliments to Fat Ann at
th' Cherry Tree an' tell her th' missus is much obliged. But 'oo isn't
very hungry just now. Th' parson says 'oo's gone where there's nother
hunger nor sorrow. But aw reckon if there is such a shop, there'll be no
room there for my owd woman. Th' rich folk 'll ha' spokken for them
parts, th' poor 'll be crowded out, same as they are here. An' yo', Ben
Bamforth, an' yo' come to look on your handiwork? Yo' may lift th'
cuvverin' for yersen. Novver mind Milly 'oo'll greet hersen to sleep
agen, when yo're gone. Tak' a good look, man--it's nobbut a dead woman,
improved off th' face o' th' earth--clemmed to death bi improvements.
Nay dunna flinch, man, 'oo'll nother flyte thee nor bite thee." But I
could not look, and I went silently out into the rutty, dirty lane and
the murk night so cold and raw. For I had no words of comfort for the
man--I could not speak in that silent presence--so I slipped away,
only minding to pass a coin or two into the hands of Soldier
Jack--"Light a fire and fetch a woman," I whispered, and Jack nodded
and made no effort to have me stay.

I was in a distracted state of mind, drawn now this way and now that,
as I made my way to Slaithwaite. My promise to George lay heavy on me,
and I loved the lad. The scene of which I had been just now the witness
filled me with an intense sorrow for the suffering I knew to be rife
around us. But I shrunk from violence of any kind and from conflict with
the law, of which I had a wholesome dread. I confess here, once and for
all, I am not made of the stuff of which captains, heroes and martyrs
are made--I asked nothing better of the world than to go my own way
quietly and doucely, earning by honest toil sufficient for my daily
needs, sustained by the affection of those I loved and safe in the
esteem and goodwill of my little world. I was not therefore best pleased
when Mary met me at the door and handed me a note which had been brought
by an unknown messenger, who had been charged, he said, to give it into
her own hands, and to impress upon her that she herself should convey it
safely to me. It was addressed to me, and though I had had few letters
from George Mellor I knew his handwriting, and I judged, too, that Mary
knew it, and had all a woman's curiousness to know what the letter might
say. It was brief enough, anyhow:

"Meet me on Thursday night at nine o'clock at the Inn at
Buckstones. --George."

The inn at Buckstones stands, or then stood, almost alone on the road
from Outlane to Manchester. All around were desolate reaches of
moorland, with here and there patches won by hard toil from the waste
and enclosed by dry walling whose solidity bespoke the rich abundance of
good stone and the little worth of human labour. There were no
neighbours to make custom for the inn. The coach never stopped there. An
occasional wayfarer, or holiday makers from the town, at times would
call there, but mine host of the Buck would have fared badly but for his
pigs and poultry. It was a little inn, remote, unaccustomed, unobserved,
and only those would chose it as a meeting place whose business was one
that shunned the open day and the eye of man. I put the letter carefully
in my breast pocket, putting aside Mary's questioning words and ignoring
Mary's questioning looks as best I could. And at this, after a while,
Mary choose to take offence, tossing her head, and surmising that folk
who had letters they could not show to their own cousins were up to no
good.

I was at the Buck punctual to my time. The night was pitch dark. There
was neither moon nor stars to light one along the road, and the road was
bad enough in broad noon. A feeble light shone from the low window of
the inn. The outer door was shut, and did not yield to my push when I
lifted the sneck. It was opened from within by George Mellor.

"Yo're to time, Ben," he said in a low voice as he grasped my hand. "I
knew tha' wouldn't fail us."

"Who's us?" I asked.

"Tha'll know soon enough. They're waitin' for us i' th' room
upstairs--but come into th' snug an' have a glass o' ale. Tha looks
breathed and flustered, an' as if tha'd seen a boggart on th' road.
There's a chap inside aw want thee to know--he's a rare 'un. He's a
better scholard nor other thee nor me, Ben, and aw'se warrant tha'll
like him, when tha knows him."

"Who is it, George?"

"They call him Booth, John Booth, th' parson's son at Lowmoor."

"Is he one on yo'?" I asked.

"As close as th' heft to th' blade," replied George. And I breathed more
freely, for John Booth I had seen many a time at Mr. Wright's, the
saddler's, in Huddersfield; and I, though I had had no speech with him,
had heard much of his great learning and sweet temper. He was not one to
harm a fly. His father was, I knew, the Vicar at Lowmoor Church, and a
master cropper to boot. Surely the son of a parson and of a finisher was
engaged in no enterprise that need daunt my father's son.

He was sat in the snug, a pot of ale before him, scarce tasted; a youth
not more than twenty-one or two years old, with pale face, long lank
dark hair that fell on either side a high and narrow brow. His eye was
dark and melancholy, his lip's somewhat thin. His face was bare of
beard, of an oval shape, and womanish. He had a low, soft voice, and
spoke more town like than I was used to. But he had a sweet smile and a
winning, caressing way that partly irritated me because I thought it out
of place in a man. But it was very hard to stand against all the same.

"I am glad to see you, Mr. Bamforth," he said, placing a hand that,
despite his trade, was small and white, in my own big, brawny fist. He
looked very slim by the side of me as we stood hand in hand, for I am
six feet and more and big built, and thanks be to God hard as nails and
little bent even yet. But it is mind, my children, not matter, that
rules the world. See how he tickled me at the very start,--"Mr.
Bamforth"--there was a whole page of delicate flattery in the very
words and way of breathing on it. It meant I was a man. It meant I was
of some place and power in his reckoning of me. I felt myself flush, and
I grew bigger to myself. Why, I do not think anyone had ever called me
"Mr. Bamforth" before. Even 'Siah, our teamer, called me "Ben." The
Vicar at the Church called me "Ben," and ruffled me not a little by the
patronizing way he had. Mr. Webster, at the Powle, called me "Ben;" but
that I did not mind, for he said it as though he loved me.

"I am glad to see you. Any friend of George Mellor's is welcome, but
your father's son is thrice welcome. George, do you go in and prepare
our friends to receive a new member. Set all things in order, and I will
talk meanwhile with your cousin."

"And so, Mr. Bamforth," he continued.

"Nay, call me Bamforth, or plain Ben," I said. "Well, Ben be it
then--And so, Ben, you, too, are willing to strike a blow for the poor
and oppressed."

"I don't know about striking blows," I said. "To tell the truth I am
here because I said I would be here; but what I am here for I do not
know, except that I am here to learn why I am here. It's true enough my
heart is heavy for the poor; but what I can do, and saving your presence
what you can do, or George, or such as us, passes my wit."

"We can try, at least, the force of union," he made answer. "We can try
what the force of numbers will do. We can entreat; we can threaten"--

"But what is a bark without a bite?" I asked. "And how can you bite
without setting your own teeth on edge?"

"Ah! there's the rub," he said. "But we won't jump before we get to the
stile. One step at a time and await developments, say I. But come, we
will join our friends. It will be a comfort to me to have one cool head
in our number. We have no lack of madcaps." The long low chamber which
we now entered was in darkness, save for the light of two small
lanthorns, placed on a long narrow table that ran down the centre of the
room. Forms ran round three sides of the room. At the head of the table
was an arm chair of ancient oak. In the centre of the table, flanked on
either side by lanthorns, which turned their lights each to the other,
was a human skull. In the chair sat one whom I felt rather than saw to
be my cousin George. By his right hand was a Bible; on his left, one who
acted as secretary and kept a roll of members, a precious document I
would afterwards have given all I was worth to lay my hands on. The
forms around the wall were close packed by masked men, in working dress,
who rose as Booth led me into the room and placed me at the foot of the
table confronting the president. All rose as we slowly made our way to
that place, Booth holding me by the hand. I was in a cold sweat, and
wished myself a thousand miles away. Booth left me standing there
peering straight at him I knew to be my cousin.

"No. 20, I call upon you to explain to this candidate the principles of
our order."

"We are banded together," said a voice from the line of figures on my
right, a voice I knew at once to be Booth's; for no other man I ever
knew, scarce any woman, had a voice so gentle, so plaintive. "We are
banded together to assert the rights of labour, to resist the
encroachments and the cruelty of capital. We seek to succour the needy
and to solace the sorrowing. We aim to educate the toilers to a sense of
their just rights, to amend the political, the social, and the economic
condition of those whose only wealth is their labour, whose only
birth-right is to toil. Our methods are persuasion, argument, united
representation of our claims, and if need be, the removal of those
mechanic rivals of human effort by which callous and heartless employers
are bent on supplanting the labour of our hands. But this only in the
last resort, all other means exhausted, our righteous claims flouted,
our fair demands denied."

"Benjamin Bamforth," came my cousin's voice across the gloom.

"You have heard the statement of our aims. Are you willing to ally
yourself with us and to aid us in our cause? If so, answer 'I am.'"

"I am."

"We are witnesses of your solemn obligation. Who vouches for Benjamin
Bamforth?"

"That do I," said Booth.

"That, too, do I," said another voice that sounded familiar to my ears.

"Place before him the Book. Place your hands, Brother Bamforth, upon the
Bible and fix your eyes upon these emblems of mortality. As they are, so
be you, if you falter, or if you fail. Repeat after me the words of our
oath."

Then, phrase by phrase, in a silence only broken by the voices of us
twain and the heavy breathing of that grim group, I repeated after the
playfellow of my boyhood and my manhood's friend the solemn words: "I,
Benjamin Bamforth, of my own voluntary will, do declare and solemnly
swear that I never will reveal to any person or persons under the canopy
of heaven the names of the persons who comprise this secret committee
their proceedings, meetings, places of abode, dress, features,
complexion, or anything else that might lead to a discovery of the same,
either by word, deed or sign, under the penalty of being sent out of the
world by the first brother who shall meet me, and my name and character
blotted out of existence, and never to be remembered but with contempt
and abhorrence. And I further do swear, to use my best endeavours to
punish by death any traitor or traitors, should any rise up among us,
wherever I may find him or them, and though he should fry to the verge
of nature I will pursue him with unceasing vengeance, so help me God and
bless me, to keep this my oath inviolate."

"Kiss the Book."

I kissed the Bible.

"Show more light."

In each quarter of the room a light shone forth, its rays till now
obscured.

"Brethren, unmask, and let our brother know his brethren."

I looked around me blinking in the sudden glare. There were many I knew
not. More than one I knew. The voice that had haunted was the voice of
Soldier Jack, who looked, I thought, somewhat foolish as my eye fell on
him. There was William Thorpe, a cropper at Fisher's, of the Brigg, and
Ben Walker and William Smith, who worked at my uncle Wood's. Thorpe, I
knew, was a mate of my cousin George, and I was not much surprised to
see him. Smith I knew only by sight, having seen him when I had taken
work to be finished at the Brigg. Walker I knew somewhat better. His
father was ever styled Buck Walker, having been somewhat of a gallant in
his younger days, and even now fancying himself not a little. Ben o'
Buck's was a young man of about my own age, dark and sallow, with deep
set eyes and a sly fawning way. He had gone out of his way to be civil
to me, and more than once in the summer-time had walked of a Sunday from
Powle Chapel, where his father was a deacon, across the fields home with
us. He was attentive in a quiet way to Mary to whom he spoke, I
understood, chiefly about his sins, which troubled him greatly. Martha
said it was his stomach that was wrong. She knew it by his pasty face
and by his hands, cold and damp, like a fish tail. Martha was a lass of
some prejudices. My father was rather partial to Ben, a quiet harmless
lad, he judged, that would run steady and show no nonsense. I did not
greatly care for him myself, but I wondered rather to see him where he
was, not having given him credit for so much spunk. But most I
marvelled, at Soldier Jack, yet did I gather courage from his presence,
for I leaned on his stout heart and his worldly knowledge, gleaned in
many strange scenes and lands.

But George was speaking to me again.

"There are signs in our Order, Brother Bamforth, and I will now
communicate them to you. The first, the right hand passed behind the
neck, thus, signifies 'Are you a Lud?' The party challenged should reply
by placing two forefingers on his chin, thus. We have also a password
which will admit you to our meetings, and to those of others in our
movement. It is 'Work, Win.' You will now take your seat among the
brethren and the business of the meeting will be resumed. 'Any
reports?'"

"Enoch Taylors taken on six more men," said a Marsden man. "They're
making frames as fast as they can. Orders are rolling in. Horsfall's
putting them into Ottiwells as quick as they're made. Th' owd hands are
told they're no use, an' young 'uns is being browt fra' no one knows
where, to work th' shearing frames. Aw'n seen some cloth 'ats been
finished on a frame, an' it welly broke my heart. Aw'n been a cropper,
lad and man, for thirty year, an' aw nivver turned aht owt like it. It
were as smooth as a babby's cheek. An' th' frame can do th' work of four
men awn heerd th' mester tell. It's ruination, stark ruination, an' me
wi' five childer an' yar Emma lying in."

"That's noan hauf o' th' tale--Horsfall's fair wild wi' joy. He says
he'll feight Napoleon wi' a finishin' frame. He cries shame on th'
Nottingham police. He says th' magistrates there owt to be drummed off
th' bench. He says they're a pigeon-livered lot, an' if he'd been there,
he'd a ridden up to th' saddle girths i' th' blood o' th' Luds before
he'd ha' been baulked o' his way."

"Shame on him, shame on him!" broke out fierce voices.

"Reports come from Liversedge that Cartwright, of Rawfolds, has ordered
a set of machines from Taylor. William Hall, have yo' owt to say?"

A man about thirty, dirty and slovenly, with a blotched face and
slouching look, who it turned out lived at Hightown and had been
dismissed from Mr. Jackson's there and had been taken on at Wood's, then
rose. He had a great deal to say. He spoke of Mr. Cartwright: more of a
foreigner nor an Englishmen, he called him. A quiet man with a cutting
tongue. Had ne'er a civil word for a man an' down on him in a jiffy if
he looked at a pot o' beer. Drank nowt himself, which Hall looked on as
a bad sign and unEnglish. Was sacking th' owd hands and stocking
Rawfolds with machines and Parson Roberson was worse nor him. I had a
sight of that same fighting parson not many months after, and Bill Hall
was not far off the mark.

"Has any brother owt more to say anent Horsfall or Cartwright?" asked
Mellor.

"I move they're warned," cried one.

"I'll second it," said another.

"Give it 'em hot," cried a third. "Tell 'em plain we mean business. I'm
sick o' letter writin'. They laugh at our letters." "Let them laugh,"
said George; "they'll laugh at wrong side o' their mouths afore we'n
done wi' them. And now, lads, enough o' business. Th' landlord 'll be
thinking we're poor customers. Let's have some ale and drive dull care
away. A song, boys; who'll sing us a song?"

"That will I, George, but I mun drink first. My belly's beginnin' to
think ahn cut mi throat."

A brother had left the room, and now appeared with an immense jug of
ale, and tots were handed round. Cutty pipes were produced and coarse
tobacco. Who paid the shot I do not know. But I have heard tell that
some masters who were threatened paid quit money, and others even gave
money that their neighbours' mills might be visited. But this I know not
of a certainty, and only set it down as a thing that was said. This I
know, there was no lack of ale among the lads, and money, too, came from
somewhere.

"Now for your song, Soldier," said George, and the men settled
themselves for a spree and a fuddle. The croppers were ever a free lot
given to roystering and cock fighting and bull baiting and other
vanities.

And thus sang Soldier Jack, and all that knew the song joined lustily in
the chorus, for that wild moor there was no fear of intruders, and our
host had not love enough for the justices to set them on good customers.

  "Come cropper lads of high renown,
   Who love to drink good ale that's brown,
   And strike each haughty tyrant down,
    With hatchet, pike, and gun!
      Oh, the cropper lads for me,
      The gallant lads for me,
      Who with lusty stroke,
      The shear frames broke,
      The cropper lads for me!
   What though the specials still advance,
   And soldiers rightly round us prance,
   The cropper lads still lead the dance,
    With hatchet, pike, and gun!
      Oh, the cropper lads for me,
      The gallant lads for me,
      Tho with lusty stroke
      The shear frames broke,
      The cropper lads for me!
   And night by night when all is still
   And the moon is hid behind the hill,
   We forward march to do our will
    With hatchet, pike, and gun!
      Oh, the cropper lads for me,
      The gallant lads for me,
      Who with lusty stroke
      The shear frames broke,
      The cropper lads for me!
   Great Enoch still shall lead the van.
   Stop him who dare! Stop him who can!
   Press forward every gallant man
    With hatchet, pike, and gun!
      Oh, the cropper lads for me,
      The gallant lads for me,
      Who with lusty stroke
      The shear frames broke,
      The cropper lads for me!"

The song was chorused with gusto by most there, and it was plain enough
to see that the meeting had more hopes from great Enoch, as the Luds
called the hammer used in machine smashing, after Enoch Taylor of
Marsden, than they had from either persuasion or threats. That something
more than words was in their minds was evident enough later on when we
all turned out into a field at the back of the Buck. There was a watery
moon in the sky that gave a ghostly sort of light. By this light Soldier
Jack drew up the twenty or thirty men who left their cups and followed
him into the fold. And there did Jack put us through our drill. One or
two had muskets, a few had pikes. They had been fetched out of the
mistal, where by day they lay concealed on the hay bowk. It was rare to
see Jack at his drilling. We were formed in line fronting him, and Jack
did gravely walk down the line, commenting on our appearance, and trying
to bring us to some fashion of military time.

And this was the style of drill.

"Hold thi head up, man; thi breast's noan th' place for thi chin." This
to No. 1.

"Dal thi, No. 2, will ta' square thi shoulders back or will ta' not?
Hast ta' getten th' bellywark 'at tha' draws thissen in like that?"

"Turn th' toes 'aat, No. 3. I said heels together not toes, tha'
gaumless idiot."

"Na' then, tenshun! Eyes front. Shoulder arms, right wheel.
Mar------ch!" And away walked Jack with his head up and an old sabre
over his shoulder, disguising his limp as best he could, at the head of
his little column, as proud, I verily believe, as though he captained a
company. It seemed to me poor fooling, then and always, but it gave such
huge satisfaction to Soldier Jack, I never had the heart to tell him so,
nor to shirk my drill.

"A poor shiftless lot," he complained to me as we walked near midnight
across Cupwith Common, the three rough miles that lay between the Buck
and Lower Holm. "A peer shiftless lot, but what could you expect from a
lot of croppers?"

"What do you think to make of them, Jack?" I asked.

"Why, nowt," he answered. "Just nowt; but then yo' see they mun do
something. It's all very well to go to th' Buck an' drink ale an' sing
songs. I'll back th' croppers at drinkin' ale an' singing songs against
th' best regiment the Duke has in Spain. But if all this meeting an'
masking an' speechifyin' is to do any good and lead to owt, there must
be action, sooner or later. And in that day it will be well for th' Luds
if there is even one voice which they have learned to obey. Do you think
it's the great generals that win battles?"

"Why, of course, it is?" I answered.

"That's just where yo're out," said Jack.

"It's th' sergeants and th' corporals. Yo' see in a feight yo' cannot
see much further nor yo'r nose end. All yo'n got to do for th' most part
is to keep your eye an' yo'r ear on th' sergeant that's drilled yo' sin'
yon learned the goose step, an' do as he tells you. As long as he keeps
his head an yo' hear his voice, calm an' cheerful, just as if yo' were
in the barrack yard or on parade, yo'r all reight an' yo do as you're
told, like Tommy Tun, whoever he wer."

"I never heard on him, Jack. Whose lad was he?"

"Aw don't rightly know, but aw reckon he were famous for keepin' in
step. Howsomever, mark my words, George Mellor's a good lad, wi' fire
enough for hauf a dozen. That lad o' Parson Booth's, 'at 'ud be better
employed if he wer' at home helpin' his mother to rock th' craddle, is a
rare 'un to talk. Thorpe's a good 'un if it comes to fisticuffs, but
it'll be Soldier Jack they'll all look to when th' bullets is whizzing
ovver their heads, an' what little wit they have is scattered an gone."

"But, surely, Jack, there'll be no whizzing of bullets?"

"Oh! won't there? Aye that an' waur. Do yo' know Horsfall, o'
Ottiwell's, has got th' soldiers billetted in th' town, th' King's Bays.
Aw've drunk wi' sum o' them, an' had a crack about old times. Oh! curses
on this gamey heel o' mine that keeps me limping o'er Cupwith Common
when I might be stepping out behind the colours to the merry music of
fife an' drum. Yo'll never know, lad, the savage joy of battle. It is
the wine o' life. When yo've once tasted it, even love an' liquor are
flat beside it. But what can't be cured mun be endured. Well aw say,
aw'n talked wi' a sergeant at th' Red Lion i' Marsden. They're
patrolling th' district ivvery night. If we go to Ottiwell's, there'll
be a warm welcome for us."

"But why are yo' in it, Jack, that's what caps me?" I said. "Yo're
nawther a cropper nor th' son of a cropper."

"No. What o' thissen Ben?"

"Well, yo see, I promised George. I cannot run off mi word. An' George
sees further, perhaps, nor I do. Then young Booth says its opposition or
submission. Opposition may mean imprisonment or worse, but submission
can only mean pining to death."

"Then yo'r in for George?" Jack asked.

"Well if you like to put it so, Soldier, yo'll none be so far off th'
mark."

"Well then say aw'm in it for yo' an' for sport, an' cause an' its i' mi
natur. But most, Ben Bamforth, it's for yo' an' another lad or two,
'at'll need a true friend an' a shrewd head an' a tricky tongue before
this work's through. And so, good neet, an' wipe th' muck off thi boots,
else that saucy Mary o' yours 'll be axing more questions nor yo'll care
to answer."



CHAPTER V

THE last day of March of that year of 1812 was a big day for me. I came
of age. It would little seem me to say what mariner of man I was in the
flush and vigour of my early manhood, but I was such a one as simple
habits and plain fare and mountain air make of most. I was tall above
the common, though even then not come to my full stature. And I was
strong with a strength that frightened me. Folk marvelled at my height,
for my father was but a small man, though wiry, and my mother matched my
father. I had in those days ever to be careful of my head when I visited
at folks' houses, for the doorways were low and there were joists in
unexpected places, and many a rude knock did my poll sustain before I
learned caution by hard dints. Many youths do overgrow their strength,
but that did not I, and though I had not 'Siah's skill in wrestling, nor
knew the tricks of the fall, 'Siah could not throw me, and once I got
him in my arms, though he was thick set and solid, I could strain him in
my hug till his very bones could crack. But my inches, three Score and
fourteen, were much mocked by the lads about, who would make a spy-glass
of their hands, and fixing an earnest gaze upon the crown of my head,
would ask with mock concern if it were warm up there.

Now on this, my birthday, nought would satisfy my mother but that we
should have a tea-drinking. I was in no great mood for such doings, but
my mother must ever have her way. She said it was no, ordinary birthday.
A man became a man but once in a life-time, and moreover, and this
settled the matter with her, in no decent family was such an event
allowed to pass unmarked. Times were bad she granted, but it was not as
though we were bound to live from hand to mouth. So I bid my friends. Of
course, George must come, and a handsomer, brighter lad never set foot
in Lower Holme than George looked that night, all fun and laughter, with
a jest for everyone. And he brought with him Ben Walker, whom I made
welcome, as I should have made welcome the Evil One himself had George
brought him. And I liked Walker as little. From the very first I
misdoubted that man. I disliked his toad's hand, his shifty eye, his low
speech. There was something sly in his very tread, and his laugh had no
heartiness in it. Then he was so cursedly civil to everybody. He praised
my mother's cakes: never were such cakes, and though, God knows he was
welcome enough to eat his fill, he did not praise them without fair
trial. He praised the tea, he praised the pig-cheek, he set little Mr.
Webster all of a glow by telling him how edified he was by his last
discourse at Powle Moor, but he had like to have come to grief with
Soldier Jack by belittling the great Duke. Then he fell to praising
Mary, and here he had like to have spoiled all, for as he spoke of her
good looks he let his eye dwell upon her features with a look so gross
that Mary coloured red with wrath, and my mother told him sharply Mary
was not a slave for sale in the market, and we needed no inventory of
her charms. So he at Mr. Webster again on religion, and as Buck Walker,
his father, had turned pious in his latter days, and was now a leader at
the Powle, the good man and Ben hit it rarely together. But his eye, I
noted, ever wandered to Mary, and it liked me not.

I had asked, too, John Booth and his sister Faith, a demure young maid
as ever made a courtesy. She was just all that Mary was not, and yet she
pleased, which, when you think of it, should set us marvelling at the
great goodness of God that hath so fashioned our maids that even their
very extremes are admirable. For Mary was rosy and plump, with auburn
curling hair, that would never be kept by net or string, but would
escape and wanton over her face and neck, and had a laughing eye of
blue, with rosy lips, and a saucy tongue. A very ray of warm sunshine
was Mary.

But Faith was dark as a sloe as to hair and eye, with a skin of delicate
white, and slender as a lily's stalk, and gentle of speech and somewhat
shy of manner, yet with no awkwardness withal. My heart, did warm to her
from the first, and I think too she favoured me from the very day her
brother made us acquaint at his master's shop in Huddersfield. Perhaps
because I was so big and strong, whilst her brother, though wonderful
far learned in books, and with as big a soul as was ever put in man's
body, was only a short remove from a woman in those things which women
love in man. And strange as it is that two maids so unlike should both
be so sweet to live with and to think upon, is it not stranger still
that two men so unlike as Soldier Jack and myself should be at one about
Faith's sweetness and loveableness.

Jack, if we might credit his own word in the matter, had a wide
experience in the lists of love, but chiefly, I fear, among the hussies
that followed the camp and the warm and yielding beauties of sunny
Spain. Yet did this tried veteran surrender the garrison of his heart
without parley and without terms to the gentle assault of this pure and
modest lass, but with no thought of other love than a father's or a
brother's, for Jack was well into the forties, and had had his fill of
the burnings of a warmer flame.

Now after our tea-drinking was done, my father and Mr. Webster settled
down by the fireside to smoke their pipes and talk of town's affairs and
the ever pressing sufferings of the poor. Mr. Webster's talk was heavy
hearing. He knew every family on that hill-side, and scarce one was free
from griping want. The parson's voice would falter and tears come to his
eyes as he told his tale, and I could see my father shift uneasily in
his chair and his hand wander to his pocket, and my mother would break
in with "Hear to him, now!" "The likes o' that," "God save us," and so
on. And presently she went into the outer kitchen where leavings of our
feast were spread, and when Mr. Webster went home that night Josiah
trudged by his side with a hamper of good things. Not, be sure, for Mr.
Webster himself, for of his own needs, though these were rather
suspected than known for sure, the good man spoke not at all; and I will
go bail he proved a trusty steward of the comforts borne on 'Siah's
broad shoulders.

For us younger ones there was no lack of sport, Postman's Knock and
Forfeits and other games in which there is overmuch kissing to my
present thinking though I did not think so then. And if, whenever the
rules of the game did give me occasion, I chose Faith rather than Mary,
had I not reason in that Faith was the greater stranger to our house,
and I was ever taught to be civil to our guests. And I was no little
nettled by the carryings on of Mary and George. In my heart I cried
shame on Mary, and said to myself it was unseemly that a maiden of a
respectable family should so set herself at any man. It was "George"
here and "George" there, and "Cousin Mellor" and "Cousin Mary," though
what kinship of blood there was between them was so slight it was a
manifest pretence and cloak to make so much of it. I do hate a forward
girl, and it was not like our Mary to make herself so sheap. Why, but
the week before, being moved thereto on seeing her more tantalizingly
pretty than common, I had made to give her a cousinly salute, and she
had smacked me smartly on the cheek and started away in a rare pet. But
I took care this night she should see I could play the swain as well as
any George among them, and Faith seemed nothing loth. Not that she was
over-bold. When I would kiss her she would turn her cheek to me with a
pretty readiness, and seemed in no wise to mind it; but when George
could spare a thought for any but Mary, and choose Faith, the colour
would crimson her cheeks and brow, and she would turn her face away, and
then, lo! all her flush would fade and leave her pale and trembling.

But we were perhaps getting over old for such games not yet old enough
for the whist to which our elders had betaken themselves. So Mary, after
no little urging thereto, did seat herself at the spinnet, which was a
new joy in our house and had been the occasion of some bitterness to our
friends. And touching the keys softly thus she sang very roguishly:--

  "Love was once a little boy,
      Heigh ho! heigh ho!
   Then with him 'twas sweet to toy
      Heigh ho! heigh ho!
   He was then so innocent,
   Not as now on mischief bent;
   Free he came; and harmless went,
      Heigh ho! heigh ho!
   Love is now a little man,
      Heigh ho! heigh ho!
   And a very saucy one,
      Heigh ho! heigh ho!
   He walks so gay and looks so smart,
   As if he owned each maiden's heart
   I wish he felt his own keen dart,
      Heigh ho! heigh ho'!
   Love, they say, is growing old,
      Heigh ho! heigh ho!
   Half his life's already told,
      Heigh ho! heigh ho!
   When, he's dead and buried too.
   What shall we poor maidens do?
   I'm sure I cannot tell--can you?
      Heigh ho! heigh ho!"

Whereat my father and Soldier Jack shouted lustily "Heigh ho'! heigh
ho!" and my mother shook her head but with a smile, and Mr. Webster must
confess it was a pretty air and taking one, and trusted the singing
thereof was not a holding of the candle to the Evil One. But Mary made a
mouth at him and said, 'twould be time enough to be sad when she was too
old to be merry.

Now after the singing of this catch it so befell that my mother had some
occasion to desire from the village some small matter for the supper
table, and Martha being intent upon getting ready the supper she bid
Mary privily slip away and fetch the things she needed. This did Ben
Walker overhear, though it was no business of his, and when Mary,
watching her chance, had gone softly out of the one door, Ben, making
some excuse, did steal away by the other, a thing we thought nothing of,
deeming it but natural that a young man should seek to company a maid,
and I not uneasy on Mary's account, the night being fine and clear, and
decent women being not molested in our parts, where strangers came
little, and all were as friends and neighbours.

Now she had been gone some three parts of an hour, when I heard the
front door open hurriedly and then slam to. My mother rose quickly and
went into the parlour. It was in darkness, for we seldom used it save
for company, and for our company of this night it was not large enough.
But despite the gloom I knew it was Mary. My mother drew her into the
house and placed her in her own rocking-chair. All had risen to their
feet. Mary's hat was hanging by its strings down her back. Her decent
neckerchief that covered her neck and bosom had been torn aside, and
some of the fastenings of her dress undone. She was panting hard for
breath, and for a time could form no word.

"Where's Ben Walker?" I said, and then Mary found her voice.

"Aye," she cried, "where is he? Oh! the coward, the coward!" and then
she sobbed and cried again "Oh! the coward, the coward." And just then
the sneck was lifted and Ben Walker walked in.

He stood in the door way; but I banged the door behind him; and Soldier
Jack took him by the arm and drew him into the room, whilst Faith
soothed Mary and straightened her dress.

"And now, Ben Walker, give an account o' thissen," said George, standing
before the shrinking man, with clenched fist and a flashing eye.

And Walker shamed and faltered. His eye wandered from one face to
another, and found no comfort anywhere.

"It's noan o' my doing, George. Tha' needn't look so fierce. Awn laid no
hand on her, han aw Mary? Speak th' truth, choose what tha' does, it
goes th' furthest."

"Oh! you coward, you pitiful coward!" was all that Mary could say; but
she was calmer now.

"It wer' this way," continued Walker reluctantly. "We'd done th'
shopping at Ned o' Bill's, an' had passed th' church an' got well into
th' lane comin' back. Aw wer' carryin' th' basket."

"Where is th' basket?" cried my mother.

"By gow, I reckon aw mun ha' dropped it. Aw nivver gav' it a thowt', an'
aw nivver missed it till nah. As aw wer' saying', aw wer' huggin' th'
basket wi' one arm, an' aw'd axed Mary to hold on to th' other."

"As if aw'd link wi' sich as thee," said Mary, bridling again.

"An all at onst, about half-way up th' broo' a felly lope ovver th'
wall. He wer' a big un, aw tell yo', an' ther' wer' more behind, aw
heard 'em eggin' 'im on. If he'd been by hissen aw'd ha stood up to him
if he'd been as big as a steeple. He said nowt to me, but he gate hold
o' Mary an 'oo started to scream an' struggle, an' aw heerd him say he'd
have a kiss if he died for it. Aw wer' for parting on 'em, but he gav'
me such a look, an' aw thowt aw heerd others comin, so aw just made off
across th' fields. Tha' knows, George, duty afore everything, an' if th'
soldiers is about they're happen comin' here an' tha' knows best whether
tha' wants to see 'em."

"A soldier was it," I cried. "What mak' o' man wor he?"

"Aw tell thee bigger nor thissen, wi' a black poll an' a eye like a
dagger blade for keen, an' ther' were a scar across his face."

"It were one o' them chaps 'at's stayin' at John Race's at th' Red Lion
i' Marsden," said Mary. "He stopped me once afore a week back, when aw
wer' walkin' out that way on. But he spoke me civil then, an' aw thowt
nowt on it. But he's been drinkin' to-neet an' used me rough an' fleyed
me. But aw reckon he'll keep his distance another time. It'll be a
lesson to him."

"How does ta mean, Mary?" said my mother. "Aw got one o' his fingers
between my teeth an' aw bit him, an' bit him, an' bit him, an' he had
hard to do to throw me off. Then he called me a vicious little devil,
an' aw tucked up my skirts an' ran for it. Aw wer' more fleyed nor hurt.
But thee! Ben Walker, thee!" and she turned from him, with a look of
such contempt and scorn that Ben hung his head with a hang-dog look and
mumbling something about outstaying his welcome and making his way
shorter, he slunk off, no one staying him.

And thus was my birthday party dashed. We could settle down to nought
after that. Mary was feverish, and laughed over much. My father talked
of going down on the morrow to Milnsbridge and laying complaint to
Justice Radcliffe. Little Mr. Webster said something, in a very
half-hearted way, about praying for those that despitefully use us, and
my mother flighted Mary, most unjustly I thought, for having ever spoken
to the man at all, and so encouraged him. Soldier Jack said little, but
I know he resented the outrage, for it is one thing for soldiers to make
light with other folks' women-kind and another guess sort of thing to
have your own friends fall into their clutches. But George was warmest
of all. He made us a grand speech agen the army and officers and men,
which Soldier Jack swallowed with an ill grace. Hetty listened to him
with all her ears, and you could see she liked to hear him rave on. And
Mary, too, when first he began, harkened keen enough, but soon she
turned away impatiently and busied herself with setting the supper, and
I thought she had looked for something from George which did not come.

For me, I am slow of speech, stupid, Mary ever said. But I thought to
myself: "A long, tall man, as big as a steeple, with a black poll, and a
scar on his cheek," and long after George and John Booth and pretty prim
Faith had started for Huddersfield, and Soldier Jack and Mr. Webster had
gone Powle way, I lay awake in bed thinking of a thing. The next morning
I was up betimes. My father was away after the forenoon drinking, to try
to sell a piece or two, a thing that every week became more difficult.
There was no work to be done after the cattle had been foddered. We had
almost given up work at our trade. We bad as many pieces in stock as we
had room for it had gone hard with us to stop the output of country
work, but what would you with the best mind in the world, you cannot go
on forever making to stock. So our looms were still and time hung heavy
on our bands. In the shippon I had had a word with 'Siah and when,
dressed in my Sunday best, I struck off towards Marsden. I found him
waiting for me on the road. "Yo' mun keep' yo're head, Ben," he said,
"Watch his een. Face him square an' watch his een. He's a big 'un wi' a
long reach. He'll likely come: at thee like a mad bull. Keep out on his
way when he rushes. Let him tire hissen. Keep thi' wind. Dunnot let him
blow thee, let him blow hissen. He'll be in bad fettle, wi' no stay in
him. Th' way these sogers ha' been living lately, he'll ha' more water
nor wind in him, an' more ale nor water. Then, when he shows signals o'
distress, work slowly in, and when tha' gets a fair chance, hug him,
break his ribs, squeeze th' guts out on him. Glory hallelujah, he'll
gasp like a cod!" Then would 'Siah, after looking carefully round to see
we were not observed, stop in his walk and feel my arms and legs as if I
were a horse he wished to buy; then at it again with more advice. Once,
with a wistful air, he surmised it might be better to fight by proxy, to
let him pick a quarrel with Long Tom, as he said they called the soldier
who had misused our Mary so. But he did not try long on that tack and
had to content himself with hoping that some day or night, one of the
red coats would try his game on with Martha and then--Glory Hallelujah!
I smiled and 'Siah read my thoughts but he only said: "Oh! them sort's
noan particular. An' there's points about Martha, mind you, there's
points about Martha."

At the Red Lion we found John Race, the little, round, red faced
landlord in no very good humour. It was early in the day for drinking,
to my taste, but 'Siah having a nice sense of honour in these matters,
declared we must have some thing for the good of the house and offered,
if I could not stomach a pint myself, to drink my share. So I called for
a quart for 'Siah. Race handled my money very lovingly and then spit
over it for luck.

"It's little of the ready comes my way now, Ben," he said.

"What! and a houseful of soldiers, John?"

"Oh! dun-not speak on it, Ben," he cried. "It's a ruined man I shall be
if this goes on another month. It's 'John' here and 'landlord' there
from morning till night or till next morning rather. And paying for
their drink is just the last thing they think of. Th' kitchen door is
white wi' chalk, and, well I know it's no use keeping the scores. It's
just force of habit.

"But surely, John, you need not serve them unless they pay."

"It's easy talking, Ben. Th' law's one thing, but a house full o'
soldiers is another. And aw cannot be everywhere an' my dowter an' th'
servant, an' for owt aw know th' missus hersen are all just in a league
to ruin me. Their heads are all turned wi' th' soldiers an' such
carryin's on in a decent man's house wer nivver seen before or since."

"But what about the officer in command?"

"What, him! Complaining to him is just like falling out with the devil
an' going to hell for justice. Sometimes he laughs at me, sometimes he
swears at me, sometimes he sneers at me, and to cap all, when I turn, as
a trodden worm will turn at times, he just tells me to go clean the
pewters, and send mi dowter to amuse him. An' th' warst on it is 'oo's
willin' enough to go. What will be th' end of it all, is fair beyond me.
But nine months 'll tell a tale i' Marsden, or my name's not John Race."

John would have run on for ever, but I was anxious to get my own
business done so I bade him show me up to the Captain's room. The
landlord's own private sitting room and an adjoining bedroom had been
appropriated by the officer, and I followed John up the narrow,
creaking, stairs. At a door on the landing he knocked, and a thin voice
within called on us to enter and be damned to us.

The room was small and low and packed with furniture of all styles and
ages, more like a dealer's shop than an ordinary room. Folk said that
many a quaint and costly ornament had found its way to John Race's in
settlement of ale shots and gone to deck the room which was his wife's
delight. But Captain Northman or his friends had treated it with scant
reverence. On a table in the centre were a pack or two of cards and a
couple of candles, that had guttered in the socket. A decanter half full
of brandy stood by their side, whilst another, empty, and the fragments
of a glass, lay on the floor. Boots, spurs, gloves, swords canes, were
strewn about on the chairs, and the scent of stale tobacco reek and
fumes of strong waters filled the room. A table, with an untasted
breakfast set upon it, was drawn to the window, and by it, in a
cushioned chair, sat a young man of some five and twenty years, dressed
in his small clothes and a gaudy dressing-gown, yawning wofully and
raising with unsteady hand a morning draught to his tremulous lips. He
had evidently had a night of it and his temper was none the better for
it. I raised my hand respectfully to my forehead as I had seen soldiers
do, but he only stretched out his legs and stared me rudely in the face.

"Well, fellow," he said at length, "what's your pleasure of me that you
must break in on my breakfast?"

"My name, sir, is Benjamin Bamforth."

"Ben o' Bill's o' Holme," said the landlord.

"Well, why the devil can't he stop at home?" said my lord. "Come, sir,
your business."

"Captain Northman," I said civilly, and speaking my finest, nothing
daunted by his captaincy, but nettled by his slack manners, for even Mr.
Chew, the vicar, treated me with civility as my father's son; "Captain
Northman, you have in your Company, a soldier known as Long Tom, his
proper name I know not, nor his rank."

"Corporal Tom, well, what of him?"

"Sir, I complain that last night he did wantonly and without enticement
or other warrant insult my own cousin Mary, as she was returning home
late in the evening."

"Well, sir?"

"And I lay this complaint that he may be punished as he deserves."

"And is that all?"

"And enough too, it seems to me, Captain Northman."

"Good God! was ever the like heard!" exclaimed the Captain. "Here I am
half pulled out of my bed in the small hours by a giant boor, my head
all splitting with this vile liquor not fit for hog wash, and all
because Long Tom chooses to kiss a pretty girl, who ten to one was
nothing loth."

"Captain Northman," I said, very quietly, "I may be a boor, but I am one
of the boors that pay your wages. Neither is it the part of a gentleman
to meet a request for redress by an added insult. But I see I mistook my
man and now I shall take my own course." So I turned on my heels and
strode down the steps.

"Long Tom's in the kitchen," whispered 'Siah, and to the kitchen I
strode.

Here were about a dozen men in shirt sleeves, lounging and lolling
about, some smoking, some pipe-claying their belts and polishing their
arms, others drinking and at cards even thus early. It was not difficult
to pick out my man. He was stood with legs outstretched before the fire.
I made straight to him, and by the look he gave I knew he guessed my
errand. I strode straight to him and without a word I smote him with the
back of my hand across the face. The angry blood rushed to his cheeks,
and he clenched his fist. The other soldiers jumped to their feet. "Fair
play" cried 'Siah. "Man to man and fair play."

"A fight, a fight."

"A ring, a ring."

"Into the yard with you my bully boys" said one who seemed to have
authority, and into the yard we went, the whole company behind us, in
great good humour at anything that promised sport.

"Two cans to one on Long Tom," I heard. "I lay even on the bumpkin,"
said another, and I was grateful even for that bit of backing.

"Keep thi' temper an' bide your chance," whispered 'Siah, anxious to the
last.

And then we faced each other, Long Tom and I. He was stripped to the
shirt and I stripped too. He was as big a man as I with more flesh and
more skill. But all the loose living had told on him and he soon began
to blow. He hammered at me lustily and I took it smiling. If he brayed
my face to a pulp I meant to get one in at him. My chance came at last.
I put all my force and all my weight into one blow full at his mouth. He
guarded and made as tho' to counter. But his guard went back on himself,
and my fist went plumb on his month. He went down like a felled ox and
rolled on the ground kicking his heels and spitting out blood and his
teeth. Then 'Siah raised a great shout and even some of the soldiers
seemed not sorry to see the mighty fallen. And 'Siah led me off, feeling
dazed and weak as a woman, and with a strong bent to blubber like a
baby, now it was all over, for I am not used to fighting, and would any
day rather give a point or two than fratch.

John Race, in a quiet way, was as rejoiced as 'Siah, but dare not show
it too openly, for fear of angering the soldiers, of whom he was in
great dread. But as I put my head under the pump and swilled my face he
brought me a stiff runner of brandy and would take no pay. And presently
others of the company came a round me and pressed me to drink, and the
little captain, who had watched us from the window, came down and urged
me to take the King's shilling. "Faith," said he, "there's blood in you,
man. I thought they put sizing in your veins, but it's blood after all."
"Aye, my little tom tit," said 'Siah who had no reverence for dignities.
"It's blood 'at wouldn't stand mastering by sich as thee. Tha' need'nt
fluster thissen. Aw'm noan bahn to hurt thee. But if tha' can get any o'
these felly's to back thee, aw'll be glad to feight the two on you.
Will'nt one on yo' oblige me? Noa? Weel nivver mind, cap'n, aw'll happen
come across thee in a year or twi when th'art full grown, an' if thi'
mother 'll let thee, tha' may happen ha' a bang at me. Come, Ben, let's
go back to yar wark. This is nobbut babby lakin!" And so, 'Siah bore me
off, with colours flying.

On our homeward way we had much scheming as to how I should account for
my face, which began to puff and show divers colours. 'Siah was for
telling the story as it was, but I had no mind that Mary's name should
be mixed up in it. So we kept abroad the whole day and to my mother's
great grief and my father's anger we presented ourselves late at night;
'Siah really, and myself feigning to be drunk. And Mary was so disgusted
that she would scarce look at me, saying the sight of my face set her
against her food. But towards the week end, Martha musts have got the
secret from 'Siah and passed it on, for one night when I sat brooding by
the fire, with no light but the glow of the embers, a light form stole
softly behind my chair, and a pair of warm arms went round my neck and a
tearful voice sobbed.

"O! Ben, yo' mun forgive me. But aw'll never forgive missen."

What is the magic of a woman's kiss and how comes it that under some
conditions the touch of her lips will stir you not at all, and under
others will kindle in your heart a flame that lasts your life-time. Till
that moment I vow I had had no love for my cousin Mary, save such as a
brother may have for his sister, between which and a lover's love is, I
take it, the difference between the light of the moon, and the light of
the sun. I had sometimes kissed her and she had submitted as not
minding. But of late she had eluded me when I had sought to salute her,
which skittishness I had put down to what was going on between her and
George. And now, unsought, she had put her arms about my neck and drawn
back my head to the warm cushion of her breast and pressed a kiss upon
my brow. And lo! love, glorious love, full grown and lusty, leaped into
the ocean of my being and ruled it thenceforth for even. And yet when I
sprung to my feet and held out my arms and would have taken Mary to my
heart, she sprung away and bade me keep my distance, and when I made to
take what she would not grant, she grew angered, so that my heart fell
and I was sick with doubts and sadness. And here, tho' little given to
preaching, I would deliver my homily anent all shams and make-believes.
Here was Mary setting my thoughts once more on a wrong tack so that I
had no choice but return to what I had taken for granted, that it was a
made up thing between her and George Mellor. And but for that belief
many things that happened might not have befallen. Then, too, after my
fight with Long Tom, my father gave me a talking to on my loose and
raffish ways, and yet the very next market day, I heard of his boasting
to all and sundry of my deeds, and the rumour thereof grew so much
beyond the simple truth that I should not have some day been surprised
to hear that I had routed a whole regiment. My mother, too, scolded me
not a little and wept over my bruised skin, but among the women folk of
our parish she bragged so much of my strength and my courage that I had
like to become a laughing stock among the men. Even little Mr. Webster,
who spoke to me at nigh an hour's length on the sinfulness of brawling
and on the Christian duty of turning, the other cheek to the smiter, did
ever after that honour me by asking the support of my arm when he
returned late home, saying no one would molest him while I was by. Only
Martha, among them all, was honest, for she made no secret of her
delight in me, loading me with praises so that 'Siah began to look at me
with an evil eye, and she insisted on giving me each day to breakfast a
double portion of porridge and piling up blankets on my bed till I was
like to be smothered.

But Mary spoke of my doings not at all, whilst Faith, when she heard of
the fray, prattled prettily a whole afternoon, and said so many sweet
things to me that Mary became waspish and told her I was set up enough
by nature without folk going out of their way to spoil me by soft
sawder. Then Faith must unsay half she had said and finished by opining
that, after all, the proper course would have been to horse-whip Captain
Northman before his own Company.

And this, she thought, was what George would have done.



CHAPTER VI.

It must not be supposed, because I have turned aside to tell of my own
poor affairs, that the Luddites were idle all this while. Indeed it is
very difficult for me to give any notion of the state of this part of
the country at that time. Trade was as bad as bad could be. Nobody
seemed to have any money to spend on clothes. It took most folk all
their time to line the inside, and the outside had to make shift as best
it could. It was cruel to see the homes of those who had no back set and
depended on their daily toil for their daily bread. And yet some
manufacturers persisted in putting in machines that could have but one
effect, to turn adrift many of those who still had work. And with it all
arose in the minds not only of the croppers but of all the working
people for miles around a feeling of injustice, of oppression, a
rankling sense of wrong. And the poor felt for the poor. They got it
into their heads that the rich cared nought about them, that their only
thought was to look after themselves, to fill their own pockets, and the
working folk might rot in their rags for ought they cared. And added to
this was a chafing sense of their own helplessness. They felt like
prisoned birds dashing against the bars of a cage. You see they had no
say in anything at all. They were Englishmen only in name their lives,
even when times were fairly good, were none of the brightest. It was
mostly work and bed and not too much bed. Hard work and scant fare and
little pleasure. They had love and friendship, for these come by nature,
but they had little else to bring a ray or two of sunshine into their
lives. When people in those days met together to set forth their
grievances they were persecuted for sedition; when they didn't meet and
were quiet and law-abiding our betters said we had no grievances. Nay,
if there was no violence both of speech and action the wise-acres in
London said and thought all things were for the best in the best of all
possible worlds. You couldn't talk sense into them, you just had to
poise it into them. So what would you?

Anyway, before the Luddites had been banded together many weeks it was
well understood that we existed for bigger things than to break shears
and cropping frames. Booth was always dinning this into me when I hinted
at the wastefulness of smashing costly frames and other such like
mischief. "We must arouse the conscience of our rulers," he said. "They
cannot, or will not, see how desperate is our plight. Besides, nine
tenths of them have a personal interest in war, in prolonging shutting
our ports. Their sense of right will not move them: we must frighten
them." Then he would smile in his sweet, sad way and say something in
the French which he explained to mean that folk cannot have pancakes
without breaking eggs, and after that I never lifted a hammer to smash a
frame but my mind went to Shrove Tuesday and I had a vision of Mary with
sleeves rolled up and face flushed by the heat of the fire, her dress
tucked between her knees, tossing pancakes up the big chimney, and
catching them sissing as they fell with the browned side up into the
spurting fat.

Not that I did much machine breaking myself. There is a canny
thriftiness in my nature that made me dislike such wantonness. Besides
George Mellor was really the soul of the whole affair: and where George
was there was no peace. He seemed like one possessed. From the Shears
Inn at Hightown to the Nag's Head at Paddock, from the Nag's Head to the
Buck, night after night, swearing in men, arranging midnight visits,
dropping into this shop, loitering by that, counselling one man, winning
another, he seemed to be everywhere at once, to know every man's wants
and every man's grievance. What master to leave alone, what to fley. How
he did it all and when he slept is a mystery to me. And he never lost
heart never wavered from his purpose and there never was a moment when
we didn't, all trust him and all love him--save only one.

I say I didn't handle Enoch much myself. We called the big sledge hammer
that we battered the frames with, Enoch, after Mr. Taylor of Marsden.
George saw I did not like the work, and the distance of my home from
Longroyd Bridge made a good excuse for me. But 'Siah gloried in the work
and when I saw him of a morning dull-eyed and weary and his clogs dirty
with fresh clay I guessed what he had been at, and so in time did Martha
too. But I could not always shirk my share of this midnight work,
little, as it was to my liking. 'Siah had brought an earnest, message to
me from George. "Yo' mun go, Ben. Th' lads are talking," 'Siah had said.

And so, after milking time one night in the first week in April I told
my mother I must go down to th' Brigg, and she must not be uneasy if I
did not come home that night, as I should probably stay at my aunt's;
and my mother must needs send by me a basket of eggs and a cream cheese
for her sister, and a rubbing bottle for her rheumatism with full
directions for its use. I saw a look pass between Martha and Mary when I
said I was going to th' Brigg, and Mary said:

"Mind yo' don't bring a black eye home wi' thee, i' th' mornin', Ben.
But if th' art so set up wi' thissen for feightin', do it by daylight.
It's ill wark that winnot bear th' sun's face," and then I knew Martha
had been talking. But I reckoned not to understand her, and off I set
with as poor a heart for my job as if I were going to be hanged.

Up by Kitchen Fold I came up with 'Siah and Soldier Jack. It was a
darkish night, wet, drizzling and cold. We made off over by Crosland
Moor, and never a soul did we meet till we were falling into Milnsbridge
where Justice Radcliffe's house was. Then we passed a patrol of horse.
They challenged us, and each of us had to tell a different lie. But they
had no ground for stopping us, and they went their way over the moor,
their horses pacing slowly and the riders peering on either side into
the darkness of the night. I never knew those horse soldiers one bit of
use all the time, and with their loose ways they did much harm. Those
that had a tale which could pass muster would walk past them bold as
brass. Those that couldn't face them just avoided them, which was easy
enough whether by day or night, for stone fences are good for men to
hide behind, and at the best it is a hard country for men on cavalry
horses.

At the Nag's Head, at Paddock, we found George Mellor, William Smith,
Thorpe, Ben o' Buck's, his brother John, Tom Brooke, Bill Hall, and two
or three others who worked at Wood's. We had a glass apiece, and we
needed it, or thought we did, which comes to the same thing in the end.
These new-fangled teetotal fads hadn't come in then, and when folk
didn't drink it was because they couldn't get it. Anyhow a glass of hot
rum and water, on a perishing night, warms the cockles of your heart,
and for my part I should have been well content to stretch my legs
before the big kitchen fire at the Nag's Head and caress my stomach with
another glass. But George was impatient for us to be off. So we up
Paddock, by Jim-lane to the bottom of Marsh. There is a two-storied
stone house there looking over to Gledholt, with a mill at the back of
it. I knew the owner by sight well enough, a little spindle-shanked man,
with a squeaky voice. I had seen him many's the time at the Cherry Tree.
Fond of his glass he was, and a great braggart when warmed with liquor.
He was a foremost man in the Watch and Ward, and I had heard him boast
oft enough of what he would do if the Luddites ever came his way. So I
sniggered a bit to myself when we came on to the road in front of the
house. The windows were all dark in front. We went up the house side to
the mill yard. Here was a door barring the way into the yard.

"Give us a leg up, Ben," whispered Thorpe, and over the top of the door
he went, dropping heavily, and with a curse, on the other side.

"Did ta think aw were a cricket ball?" we heard him say. "Throw us a
hammer."

Then there was a sharp blow or two, the rattle of a chain, the angry
yapping of the yard dog. The door fell open on one lunge, and in we
pushed pell mell. We could see a light spring out of the darkness in the
chamber window, and we began to bray at the kitchen door. Someone had
fetched the dog a crack with a stick, and it had limped whining and
growling into its kennel.

"Open the door," cried George.

A bedroom window was opened about half-an-inch, and a piping voice, all
tremulous, faltered, "What mean you, good gentlemen? What is your will?
For heaven's sake go away quietly. The Ward are on their rounds. They
may be here any minute. My missus is shouting for them out o' th' front
window. Go home to bed, good masters, and I'll never tell."

"Go stop her mouth, and come down and let us in. Quick now, or it will
be worse for you," said George, sternly.

We waited a while, only giving a reminder by a hammer tap on the door
panels and breaking a window or two out of sheer mischief. Then there
was the fumbling at a chain, the bolt shot in its socket, and the
kitchen door was opened. And there in the kitchen, where the embers of
the fire were still glowing, stood little Mr.------(I won't tell his
name, for he was a worthy man, only with words bigger nor his heart) in
his shirt, his pipe shanks all bare, and his knees knocking together
quite audibly. Well! it was a cold night. Say it was the cold. And his
hand that held the metal candlestick shook so, the tallow guttered all
down the candle side, making winding sheets. At the bottom of the steps
leading upstairs, I caught a sight of a vinegar-faced woman in
night-dress and a filled cap.

The remains of the supper were on the table, a very frugal supper, some
cheese and haver bread. An empty pitcher was on the table. George Thorpe
got another candlestick from the high mantlepiece and went down the
cellar steps, and we heard him blowing up a spigot and coaxing a barrel,
and the ale coming into the pitcher with a gurgle, like you may fancy a
man would swallow if he were half-throttled. It was a lean shop, I
warrant you.

There was an old oak armchair by the Dutch clock, and George drew it to
the fire.

"Sit down, Mr. S----," he said. "And you, Mrs. S----, go back
to bed and keep warm and quiet. It's no use shouting. Th' soldiers are
away over bi Crosland Moor, th' constables are over Lindley way. You'll
only catch a cold and spoil your sweet voice. But mind you, no noise, or
I'll send a man to keep you company. And now, Mr. S our business is with
you."

Poor Mr. S----. I smile even yet as I write of him. He trembled so,
the rails rattled in the chair, and kept looking this way and that, and
jumping at every movement. And yet how he used to strut about the Cherry
Tree yard, cursing the ostler, and cuffing the boys that pestered him
for pence.

"You have some of the finishing frames in the shed there?" said George.

"Y-e-e-s, good Mr. Ludd, y-e-e-s, but only little ones."

"How many?"

"One, or mebbe two."

"How many more?"

"Well, mebbe three or four."

"How many men have you sacked lately?"

"A two or three."

"And how many more?"

"Well, mebbe a score."

"And how are they living?"

"I dunnot know."

"And their families?"

"My missus gi'es 'em summot to eit whenever we'n more nor we can eit
oursen?"

"Haven't yo' a pig?"

"Ay, well when th' pig's fed of course."

"Yo're one o' th' Watch an' Ward. Where's your staff?"

"By th' looking glass there, with th' lash an' comb; oh! dear, oh!
dear."

John Walker pocketed the constable's staff. "Where's your gun?"

"I' th' chamber."

"Fetch it, No. 20."

And Soldier Jack hopped up the stairs, and we heard a shrill shriek and
a cry of "Murder! Thieves!" and then Jack limped down again, whilst Mrs.
S---- stood at the stair-head and hurled threats and bad language
at his back.

"Where's th' key o' th' mill door," went on George, as cool as if he
were eating his dinner.

"Oh! dear, oh! dear, you surely winnot harm th' frame's. They'n cost me
a hundred and fifty pound apiece, an' I owe to th' bank for 'em yet."

"The key, the key."

Then from a drawer in the dresser he drew the big, heavy key.

"No. 22, 23, 25. Do your duty."

And John Walker, Thorpe and Bill Smith stalked across the mill yard with
a lantern. The dog sprung at his chain again, poor animal. There was the
creaking of the lock. Then after a pause a voice from the dark sounded:

"Stand clear, Bill," and bang, came the hammer, crash went wood and
iron, and the costly frames were wrecked beyond repair. Poor Mr. S--
groaned as if his heart were breaking, and his wife at the stair head
gave a shriek every time the hammer fell.

"And now," said George, producing a horse-pistol, "but one thing
remains. Here is a Bible. You must swear never to make complaint of what
has been said or done this night, lest worse befall you."

"Oh, yes, Mr. Ludd, I'll swear. I'll swear anything only go leave us.
Oh! my poor frame's! And if I don't die of rheumatism after this night,
it'll be a miracle."

"And to take back the men you have sacked?"

"Yes, yes."

"And never more to put up machines to take the bread out of honest men's
mouths?"

"Never, never, so help me God. Oh! do go, good Mr. Ludd."

And go we did; but not before George had very politely gone to the foot
of the stairs and drunk out of the pitcher to Mrs. S----'s health,
and said how sorry he was that business had compelled him to pay his
respects to so worthy a lady so late at night. Then we hurried off, over
the fields, into Gledholt Wood, where we took off our masks, and went by
different ways to the Nag's Head.

Now could you believe that the very next Market Day I saw
Mr. S---- at the market dinner. He was telling to a group of
listeners how he had been roused in the night by the crash of machines,
how he had jumped out of bed, seized his flint lock carbine, rushed
down the steps into the mill yard, laid low one of the gang with the
stock of his weapon, being anxious to avoid bloodshed, and the whole
thirty or forty had fled before him carrying off their wounded, but not
alas! till his machines had been broken.

It must have been some other night.

But Mr. S---- kept his promise. He put up no more frames, even when
the troubled times were half forgotten and the Luddites no more a
terror. Perhaps he had difficulties with the bank.

But that is ahead of my tale, for I have not done yet with the night we
broke the poor man's frames. Going down from Marsh to the foot of
Paddock, Ben Walker must need fasten himself on to me, though with half
an eye he might have seen, even in the dark, that I wanted none of his
company. But he linked his arm in mine, and put on that fawning way of
his that fair made my flesh creep.

"And how's thi father, Ben, and yor good mother an' all the friends at
Holme?"

It was in my mind to tell him none the better for his asking, but
remembered in time that civility costs nought, and so made him as civil
an answer as I could fashion.

"And how's Mary, sweet sonsy Mary?" he went on, taking no note of what I
was saying about my father's touch of asthma, which was plaguey bad at
the back end of the year.

It was just sickening to have him mouthing her name as if he were
turning a piece of good stuff on his tongue, so I answered him short
enough.

"Yo cannot tell, Ben, how my heart warms to Mary and to you, Ben, for
Mary's sake, and to all that's kin to her, even to the third and fourth
generation," he added, after a pause, to make it more solemn and
convincing like.

"Aw'm sure we're much obliged to you," I said; "but yo'n a queer way o'
showing your liking."

"Yo mean leaving her when Long Tom was so unmannerly. It isn't like
thee, Ben, to bear malice nor to cast up things in a friend's face. Let
byegones be byegones. Aw know aw'm not a warrior, Ben. Aw'st never set
up to be a man o' wrath. We'n all our failings, Ben, an' feightin's noan
my vocation, that's flat."

"Well, say no more about it," I said. "Let's talk o' summot else. It's
lucky for Mary she's got somebody to stick up for her that'll noan turn
tail an' leave her to do her own feightin'."

"Meaning thissen, Ben; aw heard about th' setting down tha gave Long
Tom."

"Nay, aw weren't thinking o' missen," I said, "tho' yo' may count me in.
But it's no business o' thine. Talk o' summot else, aw say."

"But it is a concern o' mine, Ben. It touches me quick does ought 'at
touches Mary. How would ta' like me for a cousin-i'-law?"

"A what?" I said.

"A cousin-i'-law. Aw reckon that's what aw should be if aw wed Mary."

"Thee wed Mary!" I cried, half vexed but tickled withal "Thee! Why, Ben,
lad, if aw know ought of a woman she wouldn't look th' side o' th' road
tha'rt on. Besides she's noan for thee, Ben."

"Happen she's bespoke nearer home?" he said.

"Aye, nearer thi own home," I said, for George and Walker lived not so
far off each other.

"What, George Mellor?" he cried.

"Aye, George Mellor," I said, and strode on faster and would have said
no more. And if I said more than my knowledge warranted me, I spoke no
more than I deemed to be true.

"Nay, Ben, dunnot be angered wi' me. It's no shame to anyone to lose his
heart to such a lass as Mary. Aw know tha's set agen me, Ben. Aw know
aw'm noan fit for her; an' if it comes to that where will ta find th'
man that is?"

I never liked Ben Walker half so much in my life, or I'd better say I
never disliked him half so little as just at that moment, for false as
he was and mean, one glimmer of truth and nobleness he had about him,
and that was his love for Mary. And yet it galled me to have him speak
of Mary at all. But he would not have done.

"Aw could do well by her," he said. "Better nor yon fine spark we call
General. Why, man, his head's full of nonsense, just pack full. All
about the rights o' man, and reform and striking down the oppressors of
the poor. As if such as him can do owt! We're all melling wi' things too
big for the likes o' us, Ben, an' fools as we all are, George is the
biggest o' th' lot, for he hasn't sense enough to know he is a fool."

Now there was just enough in this to make it sting the keener. So I
pulled up short and said:

"If that's your opinion about George, go tell him so thissen. An' if
yo've ought more to say about our Mary go say it to hersen. Yo'll get
your answer straight." And I spoke so rough any other man would have
flared up; but Ben Walker could swallow more dirt when it suited his
purpose nor any man I ever came across.

"Oh! it's easy enough for thee to talk, Ben Bamforth," he said. "Tha
cares nowt about her. Aw thowt happen tha did. An' yet aw might ha known
different. Come to think on it, yo'd eyes t'other neet for nobbudy but
Faith Booth. An' yo'll find her willing enough, an' one man's meat's
another man's poison. A pawky ailing wench, but if yo' fancy her it's
everything. Aw wish yo' luck, Ben, aw do indeed."

"Ha' done with yo," I cried in anger. "Faith Booth's as much aboon me as
our Mary is aboon you. And never speak again to me about such things as
this. I want no secrets from you, and I'll tell none to you. We're in
th' same boat as far as this business we're on to-night goes, but beyond
that we've nought in common; and so, Ben Walker, without offence, give
me as wide a berth as I'll give thee." And I fairly ran off and left
him.

In the kitchen of the Nag's Head, George Mellor and Soldier Jack and
some score or more of those who had joined the brotherhood, mostly men
of the neighbourhood, but some from Heckmondwike and Liversedge way,
others from Outlane and the Nook, were already in warm debate. The fire
was roaring in the grate, pipes had been lighted, pewters filled, and
the buzz of conversation and bursts of laughter filled the low room.
George was in great fettle that night. He was always best and brightest
in action. Indeed he had much to put his head up. He was obeyed, without
question, by many a hundred men; all bound together by a solemn oath,
who had implicit trust in him. The military and the special constables
were only our sport. They were never any serious hindrance, at first, to
anything we took in hand. The mill owners were in fear for their
machines, and would rather any night pay than fight. And for the great
mass of the people, those who had to work for their living, they
believed in General Ludd. In some way they could not fathom nor explain
the Luddites were to bring back the good times, to mend trade, to stock
the cupboard, to brighten the grate, to put warm clothes on the poor
shivering little children. It is not much the poor ask, only warmth and
food and shelter, and a little joy now and then. They are very ready to
listen to anyone who will promise them this, and if they do not see
exactly how it is all to come about, are they the only ones who mistake
hope for belief? And George liked the people's trust. When an old hag
stopped him in the road and praised his bonny face and bid him be true
to the poor, anyone could see the words were sweet to him, and he would
empty his pocket into her skinny, eager hand. And he liked too the sense
of powers. To command, to be obeyed, to be trusted, to be feared--by
your enemies who does not like it? Find me the man who says he doesn't
and I'll find you a liar.

Where George got his money from to treat as he did I don't know. He
nearly always had money with him, and when he hadn't he had credit with
the landlord. We never stinted for ale on the nights we were out on such
jobs as that at Marsh, and this night was no exception. And his good
humour was shared by all of us. Those who had been up to Marsh had to
tell the tale to those who hadn't, and there were roars of laughter as
Soldier Jack showed the scratches left on his face by the sharp nails of
Mrs. S----.

"We're winning all along the line," George cried. Th' specials is fleyed
on us. They take care to watch an' ward just where they know we're not.
Th' soldiers don't like their job. It's poor work for lads o' mettle
hunting starving croppers. Th' people are with us. But we must strike a
decisive blow that will once and for all show our purpose and our power.
Every frame in the West Riding must be broken into matchwood; every
master must learn that he has resolute and united men to reckon with.
Let us once show our strength, and we will not rest till things are
bettered for all of us. But we must strike a blow that will be felt the
length and breadth of the land. It is baby work that we have been on
to-night. We must go for the leaders of the masters, for those who
hearten up such men as S----, of Marsh, the men who have both the
brains and the pluck, curse 'em, not for the sheep who follow the
bell-wether.

"Cartwright, of Rawfolds," cried a Liversedge man.

"Horsfall, of Ottiwell's," said a Marsden cropper.

And then men laid aside their pipes and drained their pewters. And a man
was set at the door to see no strangers entered, and we saw to the
fastening of the shutters, and that no clink made a spy-hole into the
room. And those who spoke hushed their voice, and those who listened
strained an anxious ear. It was no child's play now.

"Taylor's have sent out a big order of finishing frames for Cartwright,"
said one Marsden man.

"Aye, and Cartwright swears he'll work them if not another mill owner in
England dare," said William Hall, of Parking Hole.

"I like his mettle," said George. "That Cartwright is a game cock, and
we must cut his comb or he'll crow over th' lot on us. If we can only
settle such as him, we'st have no bother wi' th' others. Na, lads, my
mind's made up. Yo' all know what this Cartwright is doing. Aw've nowt
agen him except th' machines. If we let him put up those frames he's
ordered, and work 'em, we might as well chuck up. One encourages t'
other, and if one succeed another will, nay must, follow suit."

"There's nowt to choose between him an' Horsfall," said the Marsden man.
"Aw cannot tell what's come over Horsfall. He allus used to be a decent
master till this new craze came up. But naa' he talks o' nowt but
machines, machines. An' th' way he raves on about th' Luddites is enough
to mak' a worm turn. If he's not lied on he said t' other day at th'
market that he'd ha' his own way i' th' mill if he had to ride up to his
saddle girths i' Luddite blood."

"Well, well," said George with an ugly gleam in his eye; "Horsfall can
wait. What do you say, Ben?"

"Aye, Horsfall can wait," I said, and would have said more if need were,
for I shrunk from having part or parcel in any attack on Ottiwell's.

"Well there's an easy way to settle it," said William Hall. "Let's toss
up."

"Aye, that's fair enough," said several voices. "Heads for Horsfall,
tails for Cartwright." And so it was settled. I live again that moment
of my life. Forty years roll away as though they had not been, and clear
and vivid I see the group of eager men gathered round the hearth, with
George erect and masterful in the centre.

"Who'll call for Cartwright?" said George.

"That will I," said Hall.

"Then here goes," and George balanced a penny on his thumb and
forefinger.

"Cry before it drops," he said, and span the coin in the air.

"Tail," said Hall, and every man held his breath as George tossed the
coin and caught it. He had to stoop over the fire to see the face of the
coin after he caught it.

"Tail it is," he said, and thrust the penny into his fob.

"By jinks I'm fain," said Hall. "Aw owe the b------ one, and now
aw'll straighten wi' him. He'll rue the day he sacked Bill Hall for
drinking."

And for me I too was fain. For Rawfolds seemed a long way off, but
Ottiwell's was close by home.

"We'n got our work set," said George. "It mun be a reight do. Cartwright
sleeps in his mill every night. He has soldiers there, too, in the mill
with him. The gates and doors have been strengthened. There are other
soldiers billeted in the village. Th' mill bell will alarm the country.
But we can do it, lads, if yo' are the men I take yo' for. No flinching
and we'll strike such a blow at Rawfolds as will make old England ring
again. And now, lads, to business."

It were quite beyond me to tell all the plans we made that night. We
fixed Saturday the 11th of April for the job, and a man called Dickenson
promised to let his mates on that side know our arrangements. We were to
meet at the Dumb Steeple by the Three Nuns at eleven of the night. There
were to be men from Liversedge, Heckmondwike, Gomersall, Birstall,
Cleckheaton, and even from Leeds; and on our side we promised a full
muster. Soldier Jack was to see that everyone was warned, and such arms
as could be begged, borrowed or stolen were to be got together. The boys
were keen enough for work, and nothing doubted of success. We had had it
all our own way up to now, and who was Cartwright that he should check
us?

It was in the small hours when we stole out into the raw morning air,
taking our several ways homewards.

I had not far to go, for I was to sleep with George at the Brigg.

"I'm glad it fell on Cartwright," I said to my cousin, as we doffed our
things that night.

"Aw thought tha would be," said George.

"It wer' a weight off me when it fell tails," I added.

"But it were a head," said George with a quiet smile.

"A head!"

"Aye, a head. But I knew tha wanted tails, so I turned it i' my palm
when I stooped o'er th' fire."

And yet men talk about fate.



CHAPTER VII.

YOU may be sure such doings as those of which I have written were
country's talk. People talked about nothing else. Wherever you sent you
heard of misery and want and of the men who were banded together to
fight the masters. And the Luddites had the approval of the people. I
mean the general run of the people. Not, of course, everybody. Mr. Chew,
the church parson, was very bitter against them, and warned his
congregation against them, and all those who loved darkness rather than
light. But the working men, even those whose own handicraft was not
threatened by the new frames, favoured the Luddites. I remember that in
May of that year a poor woman at Berry Brow, that was thought to have
given some information to Mr. Radcliffe, was nearly torn to pieces by
her neighbours. Her skull was fractured by a stone. Perhaps because the
Luddites felt secure in the general approval their secrets were ill
kept.

I do not know how it came about, but at Holme I was soon made aware that
I was well regarded. When I went to chapel at the Powle, people made way
for me as though I were somebody, and the women folk, in particular,
took care I should know I stood well with them. If my father and I
stopped to swap the news of the day with our friends and neighbours, and
the talk turned on the great questions of the time, men would look to me
to know what I had to say, and my words would be quoted from house to
house as they had never been quoted before.

Who blabbed? I don't know. Not I, in very truth. 'Siah, I suspect, to
Martha. For me, I hated most genuinely the secrecy and underhandedness
of the thing. I hated to slink about in the dark, to drop behind a hedge
when I heard the fall of a horse's foot, the rattle of a scabbard, or
the champing of a bit. I hated to put on a mask and a smock, and to
steal about with my heart in my mouth, and I hated more than all to turn
aside my face from the mute questioning of my mother's eyes.

Once there was questioning that was not mute. It was a Sunday evening,
about the time of the meeting at the Nag's Head. We had been to chapel,
and Mr. Webster was home with us to supper. John Booth and Faith were
there. The nights were lengthening, and there was a warmer breath in the
air, and the cuckoo had been heard on Wimberlee. After supper I had set
myself to walk towards Huddersfield with John and Faith, and before we
must start Faith had said she would like me to show her the roan calf,
new come, whilst Martha made up a bottle of the beestings to carry home
with her, so we went together into the shippon. The little straddling
thing was in a corner by itself, warded off, and Faith bent over it and
let the ruddy little thing suck and slobber over her hand, whilst the
mother with patient wistful eyes looked over her shoulder and lowed
lovingly. Then I must wipe Faith's little hand with a wisp of hay, and I
vow it was a monstrous pretty hand, white and thin, not like Mary's,
brown and firm and plump. And whilst I held her hand in my big palm,
Faith looked up to my face in the obscure light of the mistal and said
very softly:

"Ben, you know our John is soft and easy led, not big and strong as your
are. And oh! if harm come to John it would kill my father and go nigh to
break my heart. And now he has secrets from me. He is anxious and ill at
ease. He is no longer frank and glad, and he tells me nothing. And Mrs.
Wright, the saddler's wife, where you know he is serving his time, tells
me he is sore changed of late--stopping out to all hours, and strange
men coming to their shop with letters and messages, and John whispering
in corners with them as if he were plotting a murder. She says she
cannot sleep o' nights for thinking of it all. And oh! Ben, my heart
tells me he is in danger, and what shall I do if harm befall him?"

"Nay, Faith, lass," I said, stooping down to get a fresh wisp of hay,
and maybe to hide my face from that gaze that seemed to read my thoughts
too plain, "Nay, Faith, what harm should befall your John? You mustn't
set too much store by what Mrs. Wright says. What if John does stop out
a bit late at nights? Saddlering's a confining job, and most like John
needs a long walk to straighten his limbs after being at th' bench all
day with his legs twisted all shapes like a Turk. An' yo're never sure,
yo' know, Faith, o' young folk, even th' quiet 'uns. Perhaps your John's
doing a bit o' courting."

"Ah! Ben, if I could think it were only that. For well I know if John
were cour--; were doing what you say, you'd be like enough to know of
it."

Now how should that be I wondered, but said nothing, only too glad to
think I had set her thoughts on a false scent.

"But it isn't that, Ben. Speak low. No one must hear us. I know John has
a warm heart, and one that feels for the poor. And he is always reading
and talking and thinking of politics and the doings of the Parliament
men, and sometimes the things he says take my breath away. And Mrs.
Wright says--oh! Ben, how can I tell it you?--that she sadly fears our
John has taken up with th' Luddites an' is going about the country with
th' constables on his track, an' maybe th' soldiers watching him, an'
some night he'll never come back and my father's grey hairs will be
brought with sorrow to the grave."

"Mrs. Wright's a cackling old fool," I said; but Faith went on.

"And, oh, Ben, she says that it's all George Mellor's doing. She says
George will lead him to the gallows, and many a mother's son beside.
It's awful to hear the things she says about George. I'm sure they
aren't true. I'm sure George would never do anything that wasn't noble
and good and true. I've always comforted myself with that. Whatever it
is, I've said to myself, if George has ought to do with it, it must be
right. If it's right for George, it's right for John. I told Mrs. Wright
so, though I don't like talking of these things, but she angered me so."

"Well, and what did the old beldame say to that?"

"Oh, shocking things. Th' best she could find to say for him was that he
wer' a conceited puppy that thowt he could set th' world to rights by
talking big. But she thinks the world o' thee, Ben--a steady, proper,
young man, she called yo', wi' his head screwed on right, and not stuck
full o' stuff an' nonsense, like George. She said she'd warrant yo'd
sense enough to mind your own business, and those that had more had no
sense. So, Ben, I want yo' to promise me to say a word to John. He'll
mind yo' if he won't me. He's all th' brother I have, Ben, and oh! my
heart mistrusts me, there's trouble coming, and I know not whence nor
how."

I had put the lanthorn on the bin and Faith had both her hands in mine,
and her pale, sweet face was turned up to mine, and she looked at me
with eyes that were wet with tears, and her low sweet voice trembled and
caught in a sob. I never was in such a fix in my life, and I found no
way out of it by cursing Mrs. Wright in my mind for a meddlesome old
harridan, though as decent a woman as ever lived.

"And now, Ben," pleaded Faith, "you see what trust we all have in you.
Not but what I have trust in George, too, and I can't think what has set
Mrs. Wright against him so. But perhaps he has overmuch spirit and
pride, and it's no great fault in a man, is it? But you will speak to
John, won't you, Ben, and warn him not to break his father's heart, and
to mind what he does and says."

And just then, the mistal door flung open and Mary came in, and I still
had Faith's hand in mine.

"Oh! I'm sure, I'm sorry if I intrude," said Mary, "but I thought you'd
come to show Faith th' new calf."

"And so I did."

"It seems to me more like you were telling her her fortune," said Mary
in a very waspish way which she could put on very quick when she was not
pleased. "But John's waiting for yo', and mi uncle says yo're to excuse
Ben setting yo' home tonight, he has summot to say to him while Mr.
Webster's here. It's a pity, for happen if he walked home wi' yo' by
moonlight, he might ha' seen to your fortin coming true."

"For shame o' thissen, Mary," I said angrily. "Nay dunnot take on,
Faith; it's only Mary's spiteful way. Nobody heeds her." And I turned to
go into the house.

"And you promise, Ben," cried Faith, after me.

"Aye, I'll mind me, Faith; I'll mind me."

"I declare, Faith," I heard Mary say, "These may be town ways,
colloguing wi' strangers i' th' dark. But we're none used to 'em at
Holme. Yo' might be a pair o' Luddites, such carryings on."

It was easy enough to see something more than common was troubling our
folk. My father was sat in his chair by the fireside, but his pipe lay
discarded on the table, and his ale was untasted in the pewter. My
mother was rocking nervously in her chair, and she was creasing and
smoothing her silk apron as she only did when she was what she called
"worked up," and little Mr. Webster first crossed his left leg over his
right knee, and then his right leg over his left knee, and mopped his
brow with his handkerchief as though it were the dog days. "The
murther's out," I thought, for something told me what was coming.

"Sit you down, Ben," said my father.

"And put th' sneck on the door," said my mother. "I declare what wi'
folk fra Huthersfelt an' what wi' folk fra Low Moor, this house is
getting waur nor Lee Gap, an' yo' never know who'll come next, nor when
to call your house your own."

Now this was unlike my mother, who was not one to welcome people to
their face and back-bite them when they were gone, like I have known
some do.

I put down the sneck and sat me down on the settle and waited.

"Mr. Webster's been talking, to us, Ben," said my father very gravely.

"And blind as a bat I've been not to see it misen," snapped my mother.

"Talking to us about yo', Ben," father went on, "and very kind and
friendly of him we take it, and it explains a many things I've wondered
at more nor a little. Only last market day I met Mr. Horsfall i' th'
Cloth Hall, and I said 'Any more news o' th' Luddites, Mr. Horsfall,'
and he snapped out summot about it not being his way to carry coals to
Newcastle. Aw wondered what he meant, but it's plain enough now what he
were driving at."

Plain enough. But I must make a show of some sort, so I said:

"Perhaps yo'll make it plainer, father."

"Well, Mr. Webster, and I'm sure we thank you kindly and know it's well
and neighbourly meant, and only what we should have looked for from you,
Mr. Webster,--Mr. Webster says folk are talking about you, Ben, and
that our house, this very house I were born an' bred in, is known an'
watched for a meeting place of th' Luddites. Mr. Webster says he's had a
hint or two from more nor one that's like to know 'at would be sorry to
see a decent family that always held its head up an' paid its way,
brought to trouble and maybe disgrace by carryings on that's agen the
law an' cannot be justified. But there, Mr. Webster, aw'm a poor talker,
tell him yersen, an' let him answer yo' if he can."

"I'm' not at liberty to say who my informant was, Ben," said Mr.
Webster. "But briefly the matter is this. One of my deacons"...

My thoughts flew, I know not why, to Buck Walker, Ben's father--"asked
me privately this morning if I knew whether it was true, that you and
George Mellor were strongly suspected of being of the party that broke
into Mr. S----'s mill at Marsh. And others, too, have hinted at the
same thing, and one of my brothers who labours in the Lord's vineyard at
Milnsbridge says that it is common talk in those parts that George
Mellor and his cousin from Slaithwaite way are the head and front of the
grave doings that now distract the country and add crime and violence to
poverty and hunger."

"Drat that George Mellor, that ever I should live to say so of my
sister's son. And him coming here so much of late and making him welcome
to the best of everything, nothing too good for him, and couldn't be
more done by if he were my own son. As is nothing but right by your own
sister's son, and him wi' a stepfather that would aggravate a saint.
Who'd ha thowt it o' George, leading yar Ben, that wouldn't harm a flea
an' scarce pluck to say boo to a goose, into all maks o' mullock, an'
dragging decent women out of their bed by th' hair o' th' head, an'
goodness only knows what beside. But I'll lock thee in this very night
wi' mi own hands, and out o' this house tha doesn't stir fra sunset to
sunrise, or my name's not Sarah Bamforth. An' let George show his face
here again if he dare. An' so nicely as I had it all planned out too.
Aw made no doubt he wer' companying that pale faced lass o' Parson
Booth's, an' a rare catch for her aw thowt it would be to have a fine,
handsome, well-set-up young man i' th' family that would bring some
blood an' bone into th' breed, as it's easy to see their father's had
all run to furin gibberish an' book learning, so at he'd none to give
his own childer, poor warmbly things." Thus my mother.

"Well, Ben, has ta nowt to say for thissen?" said my father, not
angrily, but with an unspoken reproach in his voice: and my conscience
smote me sore.

"You see, Ben," said Mr. Webster, perhaps noticing my silence and to
give me time to gather my thoughts. "You see, Ben, a young man like you
is scarcely his own master. If you had been 'Siah, now, it would have
been different. A decent man is your servant, Brother Bamforth, and
helps my infirmity mightily when he lights me home of a dark night, a
decent man though with still a strong leaven of the old Adam and much
given to the vanities of the flesh and idle conversation. But 'Siah is
his own master though your man. His family is under his own hat. He has
neither kith nor kin, that he knows of, and he stands, so to speak, on
his own bottom. But you, Ben, are your father's son, and what you may
do, be it for good or be it for evil, must reflect on your father's name
and on this honoured house."

Ah! there was the rub. It was the thought of that had given me many a
sleepless night, and made black care walk daily by my side.

"Cannot ta speak, man?" my mother cried. "Are ta going to sit theer as
gaumless as th' town fool, wi niver a word to throw at a dog. Who yo'
breed on aw cannot tell, not o' my side. It's not his bringing up, Mr.
Webster, it's the company he's fallen into lately."

But what to say I could not think. All sorts of old proverbs came into
my head--"a little word's a bonny word," "least said, soonest mended,"
and so on. I loved my mother. I honoured my father. I revered Mr.
Webster. But my secret was not my own; there was, too, that terrible
oath. I wished for the thousandth time that I had had nought to do with
the Luds: and there were the three faces turned to me, all question, and
waiting for me to find speech to answer.

"Father," I said at length, "Have you ever known me tell you a lie?"

"Never, Ben," he said with hearty emphasis.

"Would you have me begin now?"

"Tha knows better."

"Then ask me no questions, father, for the truth I may not tell, and
lies I would not. That I am in great trouble you all can see. That I
will seek to so bear my trouble that it shall touch only myself, you
must trust me. God knows it grieves me to seem wanting in respect or
confidence where respect and confidence should need no asking, but in
this matter I must tread my own path, for I cannot turn back and yet I
dread to go forward. Press me no more, for if you do, I must leave home
and that now. I thank you, Mr. Webster, that you have spoken to my
parents. This was bound to come, and I have feared it more than ought
either Mr. Radcliffe or any on 'em can do. And now, my say's said, an'
with your good leave, I'll bid you a fair good night."

And I lit my candle, and stooping over, kissed the cheek which my mother
for the first time in my life did not offer to me, and went slowly and
heavily to bed. Long after I had drawn the clothes over me, I heard the
murmur of conversation below, and when the morrow came I had not long to
wait before I knew the upshot of the anxious debate that had lasted long
after the usual time for bed.

I had gone into the mistal, where I knew I should find 'Siah. My father
it seemed had risen earlier than usual. 'Siah was grooming old Bess,
sissing over her flanks with much vigour, and prodding her loins with
the comb with many a "stand over, lass," "whoa," "will ta?" and much
make-believe that the old mare was a mettlesome beast, full of fire and
vice, whereas in sooth a quieter animal never was shod.

"Yo're agate early this morning, 'Siah," I said; "what's up?"

"Nay that's what caps me, Ben Summut's up, certain sure. Thi father fot
me out o' bed awmost afore aw'd shut mi een. 'Tha mum fettle Bess up an'
see to th' gears' he said, 'we'st be off for Macclesfilt as soon as we
can mak' a load.'"

"To Macclesfilt? Why there's no fair on this time o'th year, 'Si. Tha
must ha' been dreamin'."

"It's a dream at's fetched th' sweat on me, if it were a dream. Aw'm
noan gi'en to dreams 'at fetch me out o' bed i' th' middle o' th' neet.
But dream or no dream we're off in a day or two, choose how. Tha'll be
going too, Ben."

"What do yo' make on it, 'Si?"

"Why it's plain as th' nose on thi face. We're none bahn to sell pieces,
for there's nobody got any brass to wear. An' aw reckon thi father's
noan so weel off 'at he can afford to give 'em away. So if it isn't for
business it mun be for pleasure or happen for health. P'r'aps it's for
thy health, Ben. Tha looks delikit, tha great six feet o' beef an'
bacon. A change o' air will do thee good."

"Tha knows well enough, 'Si, I cannot go away just now, not before next
Saturday. Yo' know what's fixed for next Saturday."

"Aw know weel enough, an' more the reason for a change o' air, say I."

"What 'Si, turn traitor and leave our comrades in the lurch?"

"Hard words break no bones, Ben, an' I, for one, am sick o' this
trolloping about hauf th' neet through; often as not weet to th' skin;
an' nawther beef nor beer, nor brass nor fun in it. Aw'd rayther list
for a sodger gradely. It's wearin' me to skin an' bone, an' all for what
aw'd like to know?"

"For th' cause 'Si."

"Damn th' cause. Let th' cause shift for itsen. Aw'm noan a cropper nor
a weaver, nor owt but a plain teamer, an' aw tell yo' Ben, we'd both be
a darn sight better out o' this job nor in it."

"But our oath, 'Si."

"Promises an' pie crusts wer' made to be broken aw'n heerd yo'r mother
say."

"But our honour, 'Si."

"Fine words butter no parsnips, aw'n heard Mary say. Besides honour's
for gentlefolk. It's too fine a thing for a teamer. Stand ovver, tha
brussen owd wastrel!"

"When do we start for Macclesfield?"

"Happen. Wednesday, happen Thursday. Not o' Friday if aw can help, for
luck. Any road as soon after next market day as we can load, bi what thi
father says."

"Well, 'Si, listen to me. I've promised George I would bear a hand i'
this Cartwright job, an' I cannot go back o' my word. Besides I've
promised more nor George. I cannot tell you all, 'Si, but my word's
passed to stand by John Booth, an' see him safe out o' this muddle; an'
see him safe out of it I will if I can."

"Petticoats again," muttered 'Siah.

"After that, I promise yo, 'Si, I'll be main glad to be clear of the
whole business, and so I'll tell my cousin George. If machinery's to
come we must find some better way of meeting it than with a sledge
hammer."

"Ah! that's th' sensiblest word tha ever spoke, Ben Bamforth."

"But mark, 'Si, Bess must not be ready to start till after Saturday. Yo'
understand: a nail in her hoof or a looseness i' th' bowels, I leave it
to thee, 'Si. But leave here till after Saturday I won't, an' neither
will yo', if yo're th' man I take thee for!"

"A wilful man mun have his way. Go to thi baggin', Ben. Don't let 'em
see us talkin' together. Aw understand thee, an' tha'st have thi way;
but after Saturday a team o' horses shan't drag me a foot after George
Mellor, an' there's my davy on it."

And 'Siah crossed two fingers and spat over them, and that I knew to be
more binding on 'Si than any Bible oath. So I turned to go, much
relieved and easier in my mind now I had shaped a clear course. But
'Siah had not quite done.

"Hauf a minnit, Ben. It had welly slipped mi mind. Has Mary said owt to
thee about yon Ben Walker?"

"No, what about him? Ben o' Buck's yo' mean?"

"Aye, t' same felly, him at run away fra Long Tom."

"Well, what on him?"

"He's been after her agen."

"Who? Tom?"

"No', guise ang thee, Ben o' Buck's. Martha tell'd me. But aw reckon
he'll noan come agen in a hurry. 'Oo sent him away wi' a flea in his yer
'oil, bi all accounts."

"Aye?"

"Aw cannot tell what t' ar' thinkin, on, Ben. It's no bizzness o' mine,
but there 'oo is, ripe an' bloomin' an' ready to be plucked. 'As ta no
een i' thi yed, at tha leaves her for all th' gallus birds i' th'
country to pluck at when 'oo's thine for th' askin'?"

"Stuff an' nonsense, 'Si. We winnot talk about it. But what about
Walker?"

"Nay, aw dunnot know all th' tale. Martha's ready enough to talk about
some things, particular about th' iniquity o' a pint o' ale. But 'oo
just gave me to understand 'at Walker's popped to Mary, an' Mary's as
cross as a bear wi' a sore ear."

"Tha doesn't know what she said to him, 'Si? But theer aw've no right to
ask, an' tha's noan to tell. Maids' secrets are not for us to talk
about."

"Aw didn't gather 'at 'oo said much. But Martha said 'oo heard a smack,
an' it didn't sound like th' smack o' a kiss, an' 'oo saw Ben goin' down
th' broo very white i' one cheek an' very red o' th' other, an' lookin
as ugly as a cur that's lost a bone. So tha can draw thi own
conclusions, Ben, that is if thi, what d'ye call it, oh, thi honour,
will let thee."

And with this sarcasm, 'Siah dug his head into Bess's ribs and began a
vigorous scrubbing that set the old mare dancing and stamping, and put
an effective end to further confidences.

That was a gloomy week at our house. Mary was as contrary as contrary
could be, my mother was sad and tearful, my father glum and stern. He
told me that if it was all the same to me he intended going to
Macclesfield in a day or two, and bade me write to some of our customers
there and by the way. But I knew that it was a needless journey, and
taken only to get me out of harm's way. I dared not say I would go after
Saturday, for fear of starting enquiries as to my reasons for delay. So
I merely said I should be ready when he was, and that seemed to cheer
him a bit.

I dreaded meeting my cousin George, but I knew it had to be done. My
mind was fully made up to tell him I could not continue by his side in
this organized attack on machines I had been busy thinking the matter
out. The objection to machinery was that, it displaced human labour.
Well, I argued, a scythe is a machine, so is a pair of scissors. If I
proposed to do away with the scythe at hay time and clip our three acre
field with my mother's scissors, everyone would think me a lunatic. The
more I thought of that illustration the more I liked it, and I wondered
how George would get over it. But, somehow, as I walked down, to the
Brigg to have my talk with George, I got less and less comfort from my
logic the nearer I drew to Huddersfield. George was at home and
fortunately we were not interrupted. He was in a towering rage, and I
could not have found a worse time for my errand.

"Yo're just the man I wanted to see, Ben," he said. "I feel I must talk
to somebody and let th' steam off a bit. But somebody'st smart for this.
An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth th' old Book says, an' a blow
for a blow too, say I. Aye, by God, a blow for a blow, a hundred blows
for one, insult for insult, outrage for outrage, and ruin for
oppression. The proud insolence of the man! Am I a dog that I should
bear this thing? Answer me that, Ben Bamforth."

"Whatever's up, George?" I asked. "Do sit thee down and talk quiet and
sensible. An' quit walking an' tearing up an' down like a tiger in a
cage. One would think th'd lost thi wits, an' I particler wanted a quiet
talk."

"Quiet, aye, yo'd be quiet if somebody cut thee across th' face wi' a
whip. Listen here. Aw'd been up to Linfit, an' were comin' quiet as a
lamb along th' road back to th' cropping shop. An' just above th' Warren
House, by Radcliffe's plantation, tha' knows, wer' a woman about thirty
year old, crouched agen th' wall. I could see a pair o' men's shooin
sticking out fra underneath her skirt, and it's my belief 'oo'd nowt on
her but just that skirt an' an old thin black shawl. Neither sock nor
shift, an' it's none too warm o' neets yet. She wer' crying and moanin'
an' rocking hersen to an' fro', swaying her body back'ards and for'ards,
an 'oo'd a bundle o' summat in her arms lying across her breast, an' 'oo
strained it to her and made her moan. Her face were pale as death, an'
her cheek bones seemed high an' sharp, an' th' skin drawn tight as a
drum across 'em. An' her eyes were sunk in her yed, but black an' wild
an' staring. An' her lips were thin and bloodless, an' there was a line
of blood upon 'em as tho' she bled, an' her arms and hands were thin and
skinny. Aw didn't know her, but aw stopped to see what ailed her. She
wouldn't, talk for a bit; she'd do nowt but moan. An' then 'oo told me
she'd been down to Huddersfielt to see th' Relieving Officer. Her
husband wer' a cropper. He'd been thrown out o' work. His master'd put
in two frames, an' he had to leave. He's down wi' th' rheumatic fever.
They'd nowt to eat, an' nowt to sup. 'Oo'd been sucklin' th' babby, an'
as time went on she'd no milk in her breasts for th' little one. 'Oo'd
fed it for days by soaking a rag i' warm milk an' water an' lettin' it
suck at that. But th' little thing had pined and pined, crying an'
wailin' and, o' a night, pressin' its little mouth to her dry breasts
an' drawin' nowt but wind. An' then it had th' convulsions, an' she had
to leave her man ravin' i' th' fever an' hug th' brat to Huddersfield,
an' there they'd nowt for her, an' 'oo must back agen wi' nother bite
nor sup between her lips an' nowt the better for her tramp. She oppened
her shawl, an' as I'm a livin' man, there wer' th' little 'un wi' a head
no bigger nor mi fist, stark dead at its mother's breast; and its eyes
starin' an' starin' an' its face all drawn wi' pain. It made my heart
stand still, an' aw felt as if a strong man were clutchin' at my
throat."

"Aw stood before her mute. Aw couldn't speak. An' just then I heard th'
sound o' a horse's trot, an' I turned round an' there wer' Horsfall o'
Ottiwell's coming up th' road. He wer' wipin' his mouth wi' th' back o'
his hand, and' aw judged he'd stopped for a glass at th' Warrener. Aw
don't know what possessed me, but aw nipped up th' child fra' its'
mother's arms an' stepped right i' th' front o' his horse it swerved,
an' he swayed in his saddle."

'Damn you, mind where yo're walking,' he said. 'Stand aside and leave
the road free, yo' drunken tramp.'

"But aw stood stock still i' th' front o' his mare, an' aw held up th'
child aboon th' horse's head an' I thrust it right to his face."

'Look at thi work, William Horsfall; look at thi work, an' be glad,' I
cried. "Th' horse reared a bit, an' he leaned over its shoulder an'
peered, for it wer' gettin' dark. Aw thrust th' poor mite close to his
jowl, an' aw heard him catch his breath an' saw a great start in his
e'en. An' then he drew his mare on to its haunches, an' lifted his stock
high in th' air, an' before aw wer' aware on him, down he brought it wi'
all his might an' main reight across mi face. Tha' may see th' weal. But
aw didn't seem to feel it much."

"'Out o' mi way, you villain,' he cried, an' he dug his spur into th'
mare an' she sprang on wi' a bound, an' he wer off up th' road, turning
in his saddle an' shouting:

'Aw marked yo' George Mellor; aw marked yo', an' know yo' for what yo'
are. Yo'n none heard th' last o' this.'"

"But aw cared nought for what he said. I gave th' wee body back to its
mother an' all th' brass I had on me. And 'oo went her way and I came
mine. But, as the Lord's above me, that blow shall cost William Horsfall
dear."

I hated more than ever to do my errand now, but it had to be done. My
neat little argument about machines went clean out of my head. I got
George quieted down after a bit. It had done him good to let him tell
his tale and storm on a bit. And then, when I thought he could talk
sensibly, I said:

"Yo' won't like my errand, George, but I've settled to tell you, an' I
thought I must come straight to yo' an' tell yo' what's in my mind."

"Well, what is it, lad, I'm easier now I've said my say."

"Yo' know what's fixed for next Saturday?"

"I do, that, Ben, an' all goes rare an' well. Aw've had word that a big
force fra Leeds will join us near Rawfolds, an' some 'll be there fra
Bradford an' Dewsbury. Th' movement's spreading, lad, it's spreading an'
it's growing, an' th' time's at hand when General Lud will have an army
that will sweep all before it."

"I shall be there, George."

"Why, of course tha' will, Ben. You an' 'Siah must lead the hammer men.
Those doors o' Cartwright's will stand some braying, but yo' an' 'Siah
can splinter his panels an' burst his locks, aw'm thinking."

"I shall be there, George, for my word's passed. But after that
night--yo' must do without me."

"Do without thee, Ben? Tha'rt none bahn to duff? Tha'll noan turn tail,
Ben? Why victory's at hand, man. One blow and the game's our own. Tha'rt
joking, Ben."

"Aw never were more i' earnest, George. And it hurts me to tell thee.
Yo' know what store I set on yo', George. We've been more like brothers
nor cousins, an' tha knows, tho' aw'm not clever like thee an' high
mettled, aw'm neither coward nor traitor. Aw've tried to think as yo'
think, George, an' to see as yo' see. Aw know it's all true tha says
about th' sufferings o' th' poor; an' what's to become o' th' working
folk when more an' more machines come up, aw cannot tell. But we're on a
wrong tack, George. Enoch's none going to stop machinery. Th' mesters
are stubborn, an' they're English, too. We may break a thousand frames,
an' clear every machine out of every mill an' shop in England, but
better ones will take their place. We cannot go on for ever wi' midnight
raids an' secret meetings. The law's too strong for us, George, an'
we're kicking against the pricks."

"Then what would yo' have us do, Ben? Are th' working classes to sit
down wi' their hands i' their pockets an' watch their families die by
inches? If yo' don't like my methods tell me better. Do yo' think I like
stealing about at night like a thief, or that I find any pleasure in
smashing machines? If that were the be-all and end-all of our campaign,
I'd have nowt to do wi' it. But it's only th' beginning, Ben, only th'
beginning."

"And the end?" I asked.

"We'll strike higher an' further. Before many weeks are over I'll throw
off all disguise. I'll call on every man that has a heart in his breast
to join me in a march to London. We'll strike into the great North-road.
We'll ransack every farm house by the way for arms and provisions. We'll
take toll of every man in every town who has got rich by grinding down
the poor. We'll make our presence and our power known at every hail and
castle in the Shires. We'll strike terror into the hearts of every
aristocrat who abuses his hereditary privileges to press down and rob
the poor. We'll march with swelling ranks and a purpose firmer by every
step we take, till we stand, an army, at the very gates of Westminster,
and there we will thunder forth our claims and wring from an abject
Parliament the rights, without which we are driven slaves."

"And have you counted the cost, George?"

"Aye, that I have. If we succeed, who can tell what we may not
accomplish? These cruel lagging wars that keep corn beyond our reach,
and are useful only to find riches and glory for the ruling families of
the land, shall finish. The toiling masses of England shall clasp in
friendship the hand of the uprisen people of France. We will drive from
office and power those lords and landowners who for centuries have
battened on the poor and used the great resources of this country, wrung
from the helpless taxpayer, as their own privy purse. We will establish
a Parliament in which the poor man's voice will be heard. We will sound
the death knell of privilege and inequality; we will herald the glorious
reign of equality and righteousness. And if we fail, why then, Ben, we
shall have died in a glorious cause, and George Mellor for one would
rather shed his blood in such a cause than sit mute and consenting, a
crushed and heartless unit of a people hugging its own chains. Dost like
the picture, Ben?"

"I'm with yo' George, in an open fight, tho' I seem to feel a rope round
my neck as I say it. But, for heaven's sake, George, get into th' open
as soon as tha' can. For aw've forgotten how to hold up mi head an' look
th' market in th' face even sin' aw first put on a mask an' dodged
behind a hedge at the sound of a trooper's horse. Tha's cozened mi
again, George. Aw came to get out o' a conspiracy an' tha's nobbut
pledged me to rebellion. I'm out o' th' frying pan into th' fire, wi' a
vengeance. But at least I'st have mi own self respect, an' that's summot
gained."

"Spoken like thi own self, Ben, an' now lets talk o' Saturday neet, an'
no more looking back, an' yo' love me, lad."



CHAPTER VIII.

IT WAS nigh ten o'clock of the Saturday night when I slipped on my
clothes, went on tiptoe across the bedroom floor into the little room
where 'Siah slept--how the rafters creaked!--and roused him from his
deep sleep. 'Siah sat up with a yawn that would have awakened any but
those who slept the heavy slumbers born of honest toil and pure air,
rubbed his eyes with his knuckles, yawned again, thrust, a stockinged
leg from under the blankets, muttered something that did not sound like
a blessing, donned his trousers and his smock, and followed me, with a
clumsy attempt at care, down the stairs. In the kitchen we shod our
feet, 'Siah in clogs, over which he drew a pair of socks, myself with
thick hob-nailed boots. The dog rose from the hearth, stretched himself
with a yawn, arched his back, and then lay down again with his jaw upon
his fore-paw and eyes watchful from under shaggy brows. My mother had
not kept her threat to lock me in o' nights, in fact I am not sure she
could have done, had her will been ever so good. 'Siah opened the door,
motioned the dog back to its place, and we turned out into the yard,
doubled the house side, and strode off down the hill. We met not a soul
nor spoke a word till we came to Kitchen Fold, and here, by the Black
Bull, we came upon Soldier Jack. He gave us a quiet greeting, almost in
a whisper. He handed an axe to 'Siah, and a huge sledge-hammer to
myself. He showed us a pistol that he himself was to handle, and a small
canvass bag of powder and ball. He fondled the weapon lovingly, and as
we walked briskly along towards Huddersfield, kept on cocking it at the
startled birds that sprung twittering from the hedges. Of Watch and Ward
we saw no sign. There was half a moon in the sky, which was o'ercast by
scudding clouds behind which she sailed, diving down as into troughs of
ink, then showing a horn and riding triumphantly to the clear again,
like a ship of fire in the billows of the sea. There was no rain, but
the wind moaned, and save for its moan and the fall of our feet and the
bark of a cur as we passed the scattered houses, and now and then a word
from Jack, all was very still. We did not dally in the town, for the
order was that each man should make his own way to the Dumb Steeple, a
sign well known to all of us, hard by the Three Nuns, on the road side,
near the old Convent of Kirklees. As we neared the spot we saw other
figures moving furtively and quickly in the same direction. Some were
dressed in smocks, and all had their faces part concealed, either by a
mask or by a 'kerchief drawn across the lower face. One gaunt being
strode on before us dressed in woman's skirts; but a pair of men's
trousers, that showed at every step, and a manly stride were in ill
keeping with the skirt. When we got near the Steeple I put on my mask
and 'Siah and Jack theirs. From all sides, across fields, down bye-ways,
from Roberttown, from Hightown, men, singly and in small groups, were
gathering. Some were even coming out of the Three Nuns, where lights
were showing through the lower windows. But all were curiously still. So
still I gave a start when a slim form moved by my side, sprung from I
know not where, and John Booth's voice whispered:

"I knew you by your height, Ben, and the swing of your gait, and Soldier
Jack is noan hard to tell by his limp. But here we are by th' Steeple,
and here should be our leader."

We had not long to wait for George. He singled me out easily enough by
my height, for I was a good three inches above any man there.

"Well in time, George. That's right, and 'Siah too. Give Martha a buzz
fra me, 'Si, when tha' gets back to Holme. What! Soldier Jack! Ah! now
we shall make a brave show, an' those Leeds lads will know what it means
to have a soldier to smarten us up." And he was here and there and in
and among and seemed to have just the right word for every one, and
Soldier Jack began at once to busy himself in seeing how each one was
armed. 'Siah slunk off towards the Three Nuns, muttering that if he had
to die that night he should like to die with t' taste o' honest ale in
his mouth.

"Come aside with me, Ben," said John, when none was bye to note him.
"We've a good half-hour to wait here before we start. There are not
above a hundred of us here all told; and we counted on five times that
number. The Leeds men will meet us, or should meet us, nigher Rawfolds.
But Bradford and Dewsbury have sent a mere handful of those that should
have come. George is putting a brave face on, but he's sore vexed all
the same."

"We've enough for th' job," I said. "If a hundred men cannot force
Rawfolds a thousand cannot. We'd do well to start and know our luck."

"We must not start before I say my say, Ben. We shall see the ranks
forming from here, and I may have no other chance."

"Well, John lad, what is it. Tha' looks as if tha'd seen a boggard." The
pale light from the moon had fallen full on his face as we stood against
the wall of Kirklees Park, a two or three hundred yards away from where
the moving mass bulked large about the Steeple.

"Don't jest to-night, Ben. I cannot bear it. My heart is heavy with
forebodings. I cannot, cannot shake them off, try as I will. This is my
last venture, Ben."

"Aye and mine by moonlight, John Daylight or nowt, say I."

"It is my last, Ben. There will be sharp work at Rawfolds. The mill is
well garrisoned, Cartwright is a bold, a resolute man. He will defend
his machines at any hazard and at any cost. Still you need not despair.
If you can but win your way in, you may overpower him and the men he has
with him. But, Ben, have you thought of it? There will be bloodshed.
There must be bloodshed. Cartwright will not ask quarter, nor will he
give it. My father knows him well. If you break down gate and door, you
will find him there, pistol in hand, and he will not scruple to shoot
his assailant down."

"Tha'rt none feart, are ta, John. Tha can slip off, if tha likes. Aw'll
ma'e some mak' o' a story to quieten George. Tha looks poorly enough for
owt."

"Quit yo'r talking, Ben. I would not turn back if I could. But, Ben,
this night's work will be my last. Something tells me my days are
numbered I do not know I need greet for that. It's a weary world, and
I'st be well out on it."

"Yo're just talking daft," I said, but I felt somehow that he was
telling truth. I could not make light of what he said, though I tried.

"If I don't go back to Huddersfield with you, Ben, you'll find a paper
at Mrs. Wight's, telling yo' what to do with my bits o' things. There's
Hume's History of England. Yo've always said yo'd like to read it. Mi
Bible's for Faith, and this ring for Mary, wi my love, an' give George
th' silver buckles off my Sunday shoon. It'll be for you to tell my
father and Faith. No one else must do it. Promise me that."

"Do ho'd thi talkin, John, an' dall thee, dunnot look so solemn. I'st be
angered wi' thee in a bit." I wanted to feel angry, to work myself into
wrath, for I knew if this talk went on, I should soon be fit for nowt
myself.

"Nay, Ben, bear with me. Faith will be a lone lass, when I am gone. She
loves me, Ben, with more than a sister's love. You see my mother died
when I were born. I wish she were well wed, George. I should not fear
leaving her if I knew she were plighted to a good man."

"There's yo'r father," I said; "but what child's talk we're talking.
Tha'll noan fall, John; aw dunn't believe in forebodings an' such
woman's fancies. It's thi liver, John. Let's go back; George 'll be
missing us. Stick as close to me as tha can get, when we come to th'
mill, an' aw'll see nobody touches thee, if I can help it."

"My father's an old man," pursued Booth, not heeding what I said. "An
old man, wrapped in his books, and more helpless than Faith herself. Do
you like Faith, Ben? I've fancied of late she turns to thee I know she
trusts you and seems to lean on your strength. Women like power in a
man, Ben, not wrecklings like me."

"Yo're noan a wreckling, lad. It's th' head folk measure men by, not
legs an' arms."

"Ivy will cling to the oak, Ben, for all that, an' Faith's is a clinging
nature. Yo'll stand by her, if th' worst comes to th' worst. Promise me,
Ben. On thi word as a man, Ben, pledge me thi promise, an' I'll go to
this night's work wi' a lighter heart."

A whistle sounded shrill and clear from by the Steeple. It was the
signal to fall in. We turned to join our comrades. John held me by the
hand, and his pale, thin face, with those large, soft, woman's eyes of
his, was turned up to me, all entreaty.

"It needs no promise, John; but if it 'll lighten thee owt an' help thee
to play the man this night, there's mi hand on it. An' now put this
nonsense, out o' thi head. Stick close to me, all through. An' when it's
ovver (end choose how it may) make straight for me or Soldier Jack, and
we'll win home together. Come, the men wait, an' our work's before us."

George and Thorpe and Soldier Jack were forming the party into
companies. There might be some two hundred of us, but I never counted
them. Jack arranged us in the order deemed best. We were drawn up in a
long line close by the Steeple. The men of the first company had pistols
or muskets, firearms, of any sort. They were to march first. If soldiers
were about I suppose Jack thought the men with firearms could drive them
off if any of us could. But Lord bless you! Most of them couldn't have
hit a hay stack at twenty yards. A few of them that had done a bit of
poaching might give a better account of themselves. But, anyhow, they
might fley the red-coats, and that would serve our ends just as well as
shooting them. Behind the shooters were drawn tip, two abreast, the
hatchet men, and behind them were to march my own lads, about a score of
us, big men all, either in height or breadth, and each of us slung a
hammer over his shoulder. I was captain of the hammer-men, and on my
shoulder I bore a mighty weapon that few could sling. Behind my company
was more or less of a rabble; men unarmed or with bludgeons only. What
good they were, or expected to be, it would puzzle me to say. They were
only in the way; but they were Luds, and that was enough.

Soldier Jack went down the line. Ben Walker moved by his side, carrying
a lanthorn. I had not seen him till then. He looked sick and wretched.
His hand trembled as he held aloft the light. Jack called the roll by
its rays as he moved down the line.

"No. 1."

"Here."

"No. 2."

"Aw'm here."

"No. 3."

No answer.

"No. 4."

"That'll be me."

And so on down the line, while those who had made answer pulled their
caps over their faces or fixed their masks more securely.

"And now, lads," cried George. "We'll waste no time in talking. We've
three good miles to Rawfolds, and the night shortens. Before day break
our work must be done. Show yourselves men but this night, and yo' bring
the masters to their knees. Yo' fight; for home and hearth and the right
to live. If there is one among you whose heart fails him, let him step
out and leave us. William Hall, do you bring up the rear. If any turn
tail, mark him. If yo' suspect treachery, shoot him. Sam Hartley, yo'
know the way over Hartshead, walk by my side, and we will lead the way."

"And now, men, ready!"

"One, two, one, two, steady!" cried Soldier Jack, and we beat time as he
had taught us in our drill, "one, two, left, right, left, right."

"Forward!" cried George, and he placed himself at the head of the
column, and we moved steadily on in the dark, glad of the motion, for
our blood was chilled with standing, and I, for one, thought less when I
was moving, and the less I thought the better I was suited. 'Siah was in
my company, and he, too, had a hammer, and well he knew how to use it. I
took care he should not be far off me at all times. John Booth was in
the rear, for he could use neither axe nor hammer, and pistols he would
have nought to do with. As we marched along over the Moor, tramp, tramp,
tramp, our feet falling pretty regular, and Soldier Jack sort of beating
time for us by shouting "Left, right, left, right." There was a bit of
breeze by this, and it was none too warm, but my spirits were rising
spite of John's gloomy words and little as I liked the job. Every now
and then George ran past me on his way down the ranks, and I could see
his eye kindled and lit up with fire, for he had lost or thrown away his
mask. Near the White Hart Inn, we halted; for here, if anywhere, we
should be joined by the Leeds men; but there was neither sight nor sound
of them.

"Shall aw go meet 'em an' hurry 'em up, General?" asked Ben Walker.

"Noa, tha winnot, tha'll stay here," said Soldier Jack, before George
could reply.

I saw George was a bit huffed at Jack's putting his oar in so sharp, and
he turned on him to say something Jack mightn't have liked, but thought
better of it and checked himself.

"We cannot very well spare thee, Ben, we mun send some'dy whose legs are
more use nor his arms."

"Send John Booth," I whispered.

"Why John Booth?"

"Nivver mind, George, I'll tell thee at after; send him."

"Well, if it'll pleasure thee."

But John Booth wouldn't go. When George ordered him he flatly refused,
and would only say that he had come out to fight, and not to run
errands. John was a favourite with the men, who liked his pluck, and
wondered often to each other such a fiery spirit was to be found in so
frail a body. So they bore him out in his refusal, and a young lad from
Huddersfield, who had been, better at home with his mother, as indeed we
should all have been, was packed off over the Moor, to hurry up the
laggards. I heard afterwards he met them a mile away; but when they
heard the sound of musketry and our hoarse cries as we dashed at the
barriers that kept us from our prey, they fair turned tail and slunk off
to bed again. Anyway we saw nought of them.

"Do yo' know where th' soldiers are billeted?" I asked George.

"Ay, mostly at Haigh House in Hightown, yonder way," he replied,
pointing into the darkness.

"Hadn't we better send a party to engage them and cut them off?" asked
Jack.

"There's more at Millbridge yonder," said Thorpe. "They're all around
us. If yo' try to stop one lot coming up, why not another?"

"There's summot i' that," said Soldier Jack; "anyway we mustn't stop
shivering here. Yo' mun keep 'em movin, General. There's nowt men hate
worse nor waiting i' th' dark. They get fleyed at their own shadders,
an' start at their own thowts. Push us forward, George, an' let us get
to close quarters, for every minute wasted now means a deserter."

"Right yo' are, Soldier. Aw've noticed more nor one slinking off; but aw
thowt it best to say nowt," said Thorpe.

"Then forward, men! Th' Leeds lot will be here in time for th' shouting.
All the more glory will be ours. Now forward and no more lagging."

We moved on again, turning sharply down a lane that led from the Moor
towards the mill. We could see the buildings now, the mill itself, four
stories high, with smaller buildings, the dyehouse, drying stove and
such like, clustering near it. A brook ran rippling over rounded pebbles
to the dam and from the goit to the great water-wheel. We could hear the
water of the beck babbling when we started, but its murmur was lost in
the thud of our feet as we closed on the mill. Not a light was to be
seen. The moon shone at moments on the windows, but no ray came from
within. But smoke came in a thin stream from the long chimney, and
showed that the boiler fire was banked up ready for Monday's work. Now
we neared with quickened steps to the mill-yard, and out into the night
came from within the fierce baying of the watch-dog. It hadn't bayed two
minutes when a single light shone out from the counting house, and we
could see it move from window to window, and other lights glowed now
from other portions of the mill. The watchers within had heard the
faithful hound, and were doubtless speeding to their post's and
standing, to their arms.

"Rush for the gate, hatchets to the front!" shouted George.

A band of men with hatchets sprang forward, and began to ply their
weapons at the gates.

"Musket men line up," came the sharp command. "Give them a volley at the
windows. Now, lads, spread yourselves. Cover the windows. Bullets and
stones, mi lads, let 'em have it."

I caught sight of Booth. I seized the arm as he was hurrying past me.
"Stand by me, John; stand by me and 'Siah. Dunnot leave our side, as yo'
love yo'r sister."

"My place is elsewhere, Ben."

"Stand by me, aw tell yo. 'Siah, be with me. See! the outer door gives.
They're in, they're in! Now 'Siah! follow me. Come, John."

I sprang forward, 'Siah gave a shout like the bellowing of a mad bull. I
rushed into the mill yard. The glass was falling from the frames with
crash upon crash, sticks and stones were flying above our heads as we
streamed forward. The volleys of musketry made their din, and now from
loop holes and from windows came answering shots. We could see the
streak of fire from the barrels and hear the sharp ping of the bullets
as they whizzed about our heads. Our men roared and roared again and
yelled with frenzied cries. There were men there who could do nought but
roar and yell and curse. They had only sticks and hatchets, and till the
doors were down sticks and hatchets were of no avail.

"Way for Enoch!" I cried. "'Siah it's thee and me now."

"Way for Enoch!" came a ringing cry from the roaring crowd, and the men
fell aside as 'Siah and I bounded to the front. The door stood staunch
and true. I rushed at it with a curse and a cry and smote as I never
smote before. You could hear the din of my every stroke rolling away
into the emptiness of the mill within, and from the great bolt heads
that studded the panels the sparks flew fast and thick as I thundered at
the door.

"Bang up, Ben!" cried the voices I knew so well. "Damn the door, will it
never yield?"

'Siah was by my side. There was room only for us two, and above the roar
of the mob, above the yells and curses and cries, above the thud of
stones and the crash of falling lime and glass, above the clanging of
the mill bell, above the din of gun and pistol, rang out the mighty
sound of Enoch's echoing thunder. With every blow that fell quivering
shocks ran up my arm as the hammer dithered in my grasp, and still I
pounded at the door, and still the stout timbers yielded not a jot. I
wielded my maul fast and furious, but now with feebler blows, for my
wind began to fail me; but 'Siah pounded on calm and stolid as if he
stood in the village smithy.

"It's no use, Ben," I heard his hoarse voice in my ear. "It's no use,
aw'm feart, but we'll keep braying. Howd thi strength, tha'll want it."

"Let's try at th' back," shouted George. "To the back, Ben. There's a
way in at th' back, they say."

"To the back be it," I heard a voice within; "We'll be there to greet
you."

And that was near the last sound I heard. I fell back from the door that
had stood so well our fury and looked up at the window front. I think I
raised my hand to my head to wipe away the sweat that was blinding my
eyes. Then I was aware of a sharp burning boring pain in the muscle of
my upper arm, and Enoch fell with a clatter into the cobbles of the
yard, and I turned sick and dizzy and faint. The crowd were rushing away
from the mill front round to the back, and I tried to follow them. But
my eyes had a film before them, and I reeled and swayed like a drunken
man, and when I tried to lift my arm a hundred daggers seemed to dig
deep into my shoulder, and my arm fell useless by my side.

"He's hit! They'n hit th' mester," cried 'Siah. "Here, Soldier, tha're
wanted here. Bear up, Ben, tha' mustn't fall. Brace thi' legs, man. By
God he's wounded." And everything swam around me and I knew no more.

When I came to my senses, I was, for a time, conscious only of my agony.
I was stretched on a pile of straw in a lofty room with bare walls of
undressed stone and great bowks and rafters crossing the arched roof. A
mere slit, high up in one wall, let in a stream of light, but the corner
in which I lay was almost wholly dark. Someone was kneeling by my side
and when I moaned in my pain an arm was passed under my head and a mug
was pressed to my lips.

"That's reight, Ben, tha'rt better now. Tak' a swig at this; it'll do
thee good."

It was 'Siah's voice, and the brandy and water that he poured down my
throat set me coughing and choking, and every cough gave me awful stabs
of shooting pain.

"Where are we, 'Si?" I murmured as I sank back again all faint and sick.

"Hanged if aw know, lad. But we're safe for a bit. It's som'dy Soldier
Jack knows. We're noan far fra' Fixby, that's all aw can tell thee, an'
here we'st ha' to tarry till we can move thee."

"An' th' mill? Ha' we ta'en th' mill? Where are all the boys? What am I
doing lying here? Oh! I mind me now. I was hit i' my arm. Where's George
an' Thorpe, and--oh! tell me all, 'Si."

"Tak another sup o' this an' lig quiet. Tha'd best noan talk so mich.
There's a caa or two i' th' mistal theer, an' if tha'll be still I'll
see it I cannot squeeze a drop aat on 'em. There's been a lass milking
noan so long sin'; aw expect 'oo's noan left 'em dry if 'oo's like th'
rest on 'em. Naa thee be still, an dunnot go swounding off agen, if tha'
can help it, Ben. Tha' fleys me. Aw thowt tha were done for. Lig thee
still, aw'll be wi' thee in a jiffy." And 'Siah lumbered off in the
gloom, and I heard him straining a thin, and coy stream of milk into a
can, whilst a cow's hoof stamped as if in protest at this renewed demand
upon her stores.

The warm rich milk revived me, but when I strove to rise to my feet my
strength failed me and I fell back again.

"There's nowt for it, Ben, but patience. Th' farm man here's known to
Soldier Jack, an' as good luck will have it, his mester's away. So we're
right for th' day, an' as soon as neet comes we're off."

"Tell me what has happened--I shalln't settle till tha' does."

"There's nowt much to tell. After tha' were hit aw caught thee i' my
arms just as tha were falling like a felled bullock. Gow! what a weight
tha are, to be sure, Ben. Then aw dragged thee to one side. Tha' were
bleeding like a pig, but Soldier Jack were wi' thee i' no time. See yo'
where he cut away thi' vest an' shirt. Then he put his finger i' th'
hole where th' bullet is, an' didn't ta' groan. But he could feel nowt,
so he bun thi up wi' th' tail o' thi shirt an' a handkerchief. But theer
tha' lay like a log, and what to do wi' thee wer' th' puzzle. Aw' looked
under a shed i' th' mill yard to see if ther' wer' owt we could hug thee
on; but there wer' nowt. T'others were runnin' off i' all directions.
Some were crying out to 'em to run, some wer' orderin' 'em to stop.
George wer' like one off his yed. Aw see'd him jump on to th' sill o'
th' lower window an' grasp a frame wi jagged glass all around an' shake
it an' gnash his teeth at those in th' mill. But someone dragged him
dahn. An' all th' while that damned bell wer' clanging like all that.
Then som'dy cried out at th' sojers wer' comin', an' aw thowt missen aw
heerd th' gallopin' o' horses' hoofs; but aw winnot be sure. Aw grabbed
hold o' Mellor an' telled him tha wer' hit."

'Cannot yo' see to him?' he said.

'Siah an' me'll see to Ben,' said Soldier Jack, who wer' knelt down bi
thi side. 'Thee see to thissen, George.' So George just gave a look at
thi an' gay' a groan an' threw up his hands, an' shook his fist as th'
guns kept popping fra' th' mill in a way 'at made me duck mi head every
half second, an' off he skeltered after t' others."

"And what of John Booth. I hope no harm's come to th' lad."

"Oh! nivver thee mind about Booth. He's noan o' kin to thee at aw know
on."

"But did he get safe away, 'Si? Did he go with George?"

"Aw'm noan his keeper, am I? Hannot aw enuff to do wi' thee o' mi hands
wi'out John Booth? Go to sleep wi' thee, th'rt talking too much."

"Yo're hiding summot, 'Si. Na tell me, an' then aw'll be quiet."

"Well, there's nowt much to tell. Booth wer' hit, that's all aw know. Aw
seed him liggin' on th' ground, an' he' wer' bleeding i' th' leg. But
Soldier 'll see to him."

"Soldier?"

"Aye, he said' tha wouldn't be easy if tha thowt John wer' left, so
after we'd tugged an' tewed an' hustled thee here, an' sich a huggin'
an' a tewin' an' a hustlin' aw nivver had i' mi life afore, what wi'
thee keep on swounding every fifty yards o' so, Jack first o' all went
back an' gate some brandy. Aw dunnot know wheer he sammed it up, but
Jack knows his way about, an' no mistake. We should ha' been fair done
but for Jack. Then he said he'd hark back an' see what could be done for
Booth; but he shouldn't come back here till neet, an' then we'd see what
could be done about movin' thee. An' we wer to ca'er here till he come
back. Naa, that's all aw know, except aw wish aw wer' a caa."

I was feeling very drowsy now and just remember murmuring:

"A caa; what for, 'Si?"

"So's aw could chew th' cud o' mi last meat, for aw'm awmost famished,
an' aw cannot mak' a meal o' milk like a caulf."

And then I must have dozed off, for I heard no more for a long time.

The weary day dragged its lingering length. I slept by fits and starts.
'Siah, worn out, slumbered heavily. A swallow darted through the slit
high up in the wall, skimmed round the rafters, intent upon nest
building in the thatch--a rat ran across my feet. I could hear the
crowing of a cock and the clucking of hens in the yard outside, and the
song of a lark soaring in the heavens made me long for light and
freedom. After what seemed an eternity of time the kine were driven in
from the pastures for milking. I heard a voice coaxing them in:

"Coop--coop--coop." Then there were two voices, a man's and a woman's,
and some talk I strained my ears to catch. "Luds," "sojers," "dead," and
"poor lad"--this from the woman; but I could not piece the fragments to
make sense. Then I judged the man was foddering his beasts, and I knew
the hour of my deliverance was at hand. The gloom deepened, and all was
still save for 'Siah's heavy breathing. Then I heard the sound of
wheels, the door was opened cautiously, and a limp fell upon the flags.

"Are ta theer, 'Siah?"

And 'Siah creeped upon his knees to the limit of the hay bowk.

"Ger up an' ma' as little noise as tha can."

"Can ta walk, Ben?"

'Siah held me by the left shoulder, and leaning heavily on him I gained
the door. Outside was our good old Bess. I could have wept to see her:
such a flood of sweet home memories swept over me. The bottom of the
cart was covered with hay and in one corner of it was our new roan calf.
Soldier Jack and 'Siah between them lifted me into the cart,--and I
sank exhausted by the effort and the pain, down by the dumb wondering
brute that slobbered upon my face and gave a slimy lick at my lips.

"Tha mun drive, 'Siah. Go slow, by Deanhead. Aw'll walk on i' front, and
if aw start whistlin' tha'll know som'dy's comin'. The sojers are
scourin' th' country. Th' Luds are hidin' for their lives. There's small
hell to play ovver this neet's work. Tha munnot hurry, an' keep out o'
th' ruts an' jolt him as little as tha can."

"What's th' cauf doin' here?" muttered 'Siah.

"Tha dunderhead. We' mun cover Ben up wi' t' straw. Leave him his nose
aat an' nowt else; then if we meet a search party they'll happen think
tha'rt fetchin' a cauf wom. Tha' mun act as gaumless as tha' can, an'
na' drive on an' ma' as if aw'd nowt to do wi' thee."

"Come up, Bess, woa, steady!" and we lumbered off past the top of
Lindley, keeping well on the crest of the hill, whence we could see the
light of Longwood and Golcar in the valley, and so, bearing towards the
left, made for Lower Holme. We passed a party of mounted soldiers about
half-way on our journey and, fortunately, at the very moment of our
encounter the calf staggered straddling to its feet, putting its hoof
upon my right hand and sending shooting torments up my arm. It rocked
and swayed in the cart and moo'd feebly at the soldiers as they drew
rein.

"Have you seen any suspicious characters on the road, my good man,
higher up the hill?" asked their leader.

"Nay, nowt out o' th' common," said 'Siah, "a tramp or two, an' a chap
'at looked as if he'd been feightin'."

"Ah! where was that?"

"T'other side o' Lindley; he wor makin' fra Grimscar."

"Forward, men!"

"Good luck," said 'Siah. "Ger on, Bess." And my heart began to beat
again.

How my mother met us at the door, how my father stood aloof and would
not speak one word, how 'Siah undressed me and put me into my own bed,
what need to tell; nor yet set forth in detail how it came about that as
I sank down into the cool, clean sheets, and laid my head upon the
grateful feather pillow, stuffed with feathers plucked by Mary's own
fingers, I heard the kitchen door open and a quick step ascend the
stairs.

"Now Mrs. Bamforth, well Mary, where is he? let's have a look at him.
Off with you now, all but 'Siah. 'Siah, you cut-throat rebel, shut the
door and hold the candle for me."

It was Dr. Dean from Slaithwaite, hearty, hale and cheery, who had
ushered me into the world and given me powders and pills in the little
ailments of childhood. He took command of the whole house as by divine
right. Even my mother recognised his prerogative and resigned her
supremacy, and Mary was his willing and adoring slave. Before you could
say "Jack Robinson" he had slit my sleeve with his scissors, lifted the
rude bandages, now sodden and stiff with blood, and was handling my arm
deftly and tenderly as a woman.

"H'm, bullet in biceps, hoemorrhage of the artery, acute inflammation,
temperature equatorial, fever, ravings, pandemonium generally!" All the
while probing for the bullet as if he were picking a periwinkle.

"Mrs. Bamforth," presently he said, "how do you feel?"

"Aw'm well enough i' body, doctor, but nowt to boast of i' mind."

"I don't think you are very well, Mrs. Bamforth. I detect in you
symptoms, my dear lady, that give me grave alarm."

"Why, good gracious, doctor, whatever do yo' mean? Why my appetite's
good . . . ."

"That aggravates the complaint."

"Aw sleep well, leastwise aw did till a neet or two sin, when aw started
dreamin' o' washing clothes, an' aw knew it were a sign o' a burial i'
th' family. 'William Bamforth,' aw said to th' mester, 'William
Bamforth, as sure as yo're a living man there'll be a death i' th'
family afore yo'r a month older, but little did aw think o' yar Ben
bein' laid low. Aw put it down to my sister Matty. He did nowt but
laugh, but he'll happen believe me now. It's a judgment on him for
scoffing.'"

"Mrs. Bamforth, you must take to your bed at once; and you must not stir
out of it till I give you leave. You must send Martha to the surgery at
once and I'll make up a bottle, and three times a day you must take it."

"But I ail nowt, doctor."

"You may pour it down the sink."

Was the doctor off his head? But no, he went on:

"You must impress it on Martha, I'll tell her myself, that you are
dangerously ill and every day I'll drive up myself to see you. You must
tell Martha to mind she says nothing about it in the village, and then I
suppose it'll be all over the Country in no time. And if anybody asks
where Ben is, he's gone on his rounds. Now do you understand?"

I did anyway, and I pressed his hand gratefully.

"It may be a fortnight before Ben's fit to be moved, and then, mark you,
he must be moved, and for my credit's sake, if for no other reason, not
a soul out of this house must know Ben's within a hundred miles of
this."

"God bless you, doctor. Aw've been wondering and wondering ever sin'
'Si' brought him home, whatever we should say to th' neighbours. An'
yo've found a way all in a minnit. See what it is to be eddicated. Aw'll
be i' bed afore yo're out o' th' house. An' mind yo' insense it into our
William, for he's that stupid he'll spoil it all. An', for sure, aw
don't feel very well; it's my heart, doctor."

And I think my mother came as near winking as ever she did since she
made lovers' signals across the pews, when my father was courting her.



CHAPTER IX.

MY Father and Siah left home that very day with the waggon. It was given
out in the little village that I was gone too, and it was soon town's
talk that Mrs. Bamforth was sick and that Dr. Dean was visiting her
twice a day. 'Siah came up to see me in bed before he started.

"Th' mester's awful put out," he told me. "Aw heard thi mother askin'
him if he weren't bahn to come up an' say good-bye to thee, Ben. But he
said nowt. Tha's put his back up gradely this time, lad, an' I expect
aw'st have a roughish time on it missen. But hard words an' foul looks
break no bones, an' aw'd rather be i' Macclesfield wi' Awd Harry
hissen,' just nah, nor at wom among th' Luds. No more sojerin' for me,
Ben. My yed's fair stunned wi' th' din. An' ne'er thee mind about thi
father. He'll come rahnd, an' then he'll ma' it up to thee as if he'd
been i' fault hissen. By gow, tha has getten a arm, to be sure. It looks
like three pund o' lites, and they'd best keep th' cat out o' th' room
when th'ar asleep, or 'oo'l be at thee, sure as God made little apples."

And soon afterwards I heard the cart lumbering out of the yard to the
usual accompaniment of the dog's excited barking and 'Siah's apostrophes
to Old Bess.

Then my mother and Mary took possession of me, and I am persuaded that
never did my mother enjoy herself so thoroughly as during the three
weeks or more that I kept my bed. Her own room adjourned the one in
which I lay, and as she was supposed to be herself bedridden she had all
the advantage of being at close quarters. She would come to my bedside a
hundred times a day in her linsey petticoat and a red flannel jacket
with big bone buttone that gave her quite a martial air, and at every
knock at the house door she would skip back to her own room, tumble into
bed, draw the clothes over her, and set to groaning as tho' in mortal
agony. Then, when retreating footsteps assured her the coast was clear,
she would steal back with a shame-faced look and busy herself about the
room. How many times a day she dusted the furniture of my room and
arranged and rearranged the odds and ends on the little dressing table,
I cannot hazard a guess at. She spent hours each day listening at the
top of the staircase to what was going on below, for she was tortured by
the conviction that things were going to rack and ruin in her absence
and that Martha and Mary were in a conspiracy to do all things they
ought not to do and leave undone the things they ought to do. Nothing
would persuade her that any cleaning was being done in the parlour, and
she knew that when she was able to get about again she would be able to
write her name in dust on the looking-glass and the chiffonier, that is
if she should haply be able to get into the room at all, of which she
was somewhat sceptical. When Mary brought my chicken broth and rice
pudding, my prescribed diet, on which by the bye I soon began to lose
flesh at an alarming rate, my mother would meet her at the stair head
and herself bring it to the bedside, very jealous, as was easy enough to
see, that he could not cook it herself. Such tasting of broth and
puddings sure never was before nor since, nor such fault-finding. Some
days the rice hadn't been soaked long enough, other days too long. Some
days the broth was too strong, others too weak, or the salt was in
excess, or the pepper, or a pinch of this or that would have improved
the flavour. Poor Mary, did it ever set you thinking, I wonder, what an
ideal mother-in-law your aunt would make?

Then, when the ball had been extracted from my arm and my shoulder began
to look less like a lump of liver, it became clear to my mother that I
was in need of spiritual comfort. The big Family Bible was brought from
the parlour and placed on a little table by my bedside. I was perfectly
capable of reading it for myself, but that would not have suited my
nurse. She read with difficulty and had many a stubborn tussle with the
hard words. At first I helped her with them but soon perceived she took
a delight in the struggle and so left her to grapple with them. As she
opined my illness would be a long one and she did not mean to be
gravelled for lack of matter, she began at the first chapter of the Book
of Genesis and advanced by slow stages to the tenth, when she floundered
in a genealogical bog from which she brought forth, I fear, only one
piece of abiding information, to wit, that the eldest son of Eber bore
the same name as the crippled son of the village postmaster--Peg-leg.

Dr. Dean was her great comfort during this enforced confinement. Twice
daily did that cheery visitor drive up to Holme, and from the long stay
that his champing, stamping mare made by our door, the neighbours drew
gloomy auguries as to my mother's desperate state. If they could have
seen him sat in an easy chair, profaning the chaste sanctity of the
bedroom with tobacco smoke, and relishing our best Hollands while he
detailed the village gossip to my mother's delighted ears, they would
have had less concern for the good soul's health. My mother declared the
doctor's visits were worth a guinea apiece.

"Mrs. Garside's been enquiring after yo' Mrs. Bamforth." Now this was
that Hannah Garside who had pulled up my mother's half-cousin, Sam o'
Sall's, because of the eggs.

"She met save her breath to cool her porridge," was my mother's
ungrateful comment.

"She says she freely forgives yo', ma'm."

"The imperence on her. Ah! wait till I get better, an' I'll gi'e her
forgive me!"

"She promises to pray for you, Mrs. Bamforth."

"To pray for me! Hannah Garside, pray for me! Oh! this must be stopped,
doctor. It's too bad 'at she's none content wi' makin' th' village
unbearable an' nah mun' be bringing me into bad odour wi' th' saints
above."

"She sends her compliments, ma'am, and says if I prescribe custards she
won't venture to send any batter as it's well known your family knows a
way o' never being short o' eggs."

"Oh! trust her for taking a mean advantage o' me, an' me laid o' mi back
an' not able to stick up for missen. Take her a cruet o' water, doctor,
an' say I'd be glad if she'd look into it an' turn it to vinegar. But
yo'r taking nothing, doctor. Fill your glass, now do, and have another
pipe. Never mind th' smoke. It's good for moths." And thus did Doctor
Dean pass the time in those professional visits the portentous length of
which gave so much anxiety to our friends.

It was Soldier Jack who told me the news of poor John Booth's sad end.
Soldier had been chary of coming at first for fear of arousing the
suspicions of our neighbours, but he was very useful in spreading the
news of my mother's illness. He had her one day on the brink of death,
another day rallying. One day it was current through the village that my
mother had sent for Lawyer Blackburn, and the undertaker went about with
a visibly expectant face. When Mr. Webster called, all hope was
abandoned. When he went away without being admitted to the sick chamber,
tho' my mother had to bite her tongue to prevent herself calling out to
him from the stairhead, our kinsfolk of all degrees began to look up
their mourning, and the stone-cutter at Powle Moor got ready a selection
of appropriate head-lines.

At length Jack could keep away no longer and came one afternoon into my
room, walking softly in on tip-toe of one foot and a limp of the other,
as tho' I were dead or sleeping. Poor Jack, he looked sadly worn and
harassed of these days and had lost all his swagger and even his
cheerfulness.

"Yes, it's too true, Ben. Poor John Booth's dead as a nit. Shot through
th' leg, an' no stamina to bear it. He died th' same neet.

"Tell me about it Soldier? Poor lad, poor lad."

"He died at Tommy Sheard's at th' Star i' Roberdta'n. He wer' a good
plucked 'un, an' his father a parson too. His mother mun ha' been a none
such, aw reckon."

"Who was with him Jack? Was he in much pain? Did he say owt? Tell me all
about it."

"Well, as far as aw can gather, after we carried yo' off t'others didn't
stay long behind. Th' game wor up."

"How did we come to leave Booth? We ought not to have left Booth. I
promised I'd see to him, and a pretty way I've kept my word."

"Dunnot yo' fash yersen, Ben. Yo'd your work set wi' Enoch. John brought
it on hissen. He wer' all ovver th' shop', egging th' men on. Aw told
him to keep i' covver, but he seemed fair to run agen th' bullets as if
he wanted killing. Well he gate what he wanted. Still if we hadn't had
our hands full wi yo', we might ha' carried him off. But he's dead, so
we should nobbud ha' had our wark for nowt, an' a mort o' trouble to
account for th' corpse. Yo' mebbe hannot thowt o' that. What should we
ha' done wi' a dead body wi' a leg smashed to mush, on our hands?"

Aye, what, I thought.

"Well, theer John lay among broken glass, an' stones, an' sticks, an'
plaster, in front o' th' mill, an' Sam Hartley shot through th' lung an'
vomiting quarts o' blood, not far off him. After a bit owd Hammond
Roberson, th' feightin' parson, come gallopin' up wi' a lot o' soldiers,
an' Cartwright oppens th' mill door, an' him an' his men comes out, an'
they do say Cartwright took on rarely when he see'd th' mess we'd made
o' th' mill front. Poor John were beggin' some o' th' folk 'at had run
up to fetch him a drop o' water. Aw know what it's like when yo'r
wounded. Yo' feel as if yo'd got a little hell o' yo'r own inside yo'.
But Cartwright wer' noan for lettin' him have a drop, not even to wet
his lips, till he'd gi'en th' names o' those 'at wer' th' leaders. But
John tak' no notice nor Hartley nawther, but nobbut begged for water.
Old Roberson, dam him, wor as bad as Cartwright. It wer' confession
first, an' water after. But a chap called Billy Clough ran an' put a
stone under John's yed, an' then fot him a drink. If awther th' parson
or Cartwright had stopped him, aw'm told th' folk round 'ud ha' mobbed
'em. Aw can forgi'e Cartwright, for it's none calc'lated to put a chap
into th' best o' tempers to ha' his mill made such a mullock on; but,
curse Roberson, an' all such like, say I, an' him a parson, too!"

"But what of John, Soldier?"

"Well at last when he'd say nowt, water or no water, they put him on a
gate an' carried him an' Hartley to th' Star. A doctor wer' noan long i'
turnin' up, for them chaps smell blood like vultures. He said ther' wer'
nowt for it but to hampotate th' leg, an' that wer' just more nor John
could stand, an' he cheat both th' parson an' th' gallows, an' deed like
a man an' a Briton at he wor.

"How cheat th' parson, Jack?"

"Well owd Roberson wouldn't let him die i' peace, but wer all th' time
naggin' him to confess. Then when Booth knew his end were near, he
called old Roberson to stand ovver him, an' th' owd sinner's face lit up
wi' glee, an' he stepped up to John as brisk as a bee."

"You see, gentlemen, the power of the Church! And now, my good man."

"Can yo' keep a secret, sir?" said John, in a whisper; but all were so
still yo' could have heard a pin drop. Even Sammy Hartley, who wer'
deein' fast, stopped moanin', they say; tho' that mun be either accident
or fancy."

"Can yo' keep a secret, sir?" whispered John.

"I can, I can," said th' parson.

"An' so can I," said John, "wi' a smile, an he put his head back an'
never spak' no more; an', oh! Ben, when aw talk on it aw'm fit to
blubber like a child. He wer' a rare un, wer' John."

Mary was there and my mother, and Mary's face was buried in the
counterpane and I heard her sob, and a tear trickled down my mother's
cheek, and I turned my face to the wall and mourned for my friend.

"We got his body," went on Jack after a long pause. "Mr. Wright, th'
saddler, saw to that. It wer' brought to his house, an' th' funeral wer'
fra' theer. He wer' buried i' Huddersfield Churchyard, an' all th' town
wer' theer. George Mellor and Thorpe walked after th' hearse, an' all
th' folk, hundreds on 'em, 'at could lay the'r hands on a bit, wore
white crape around their arm. It wer' a gran' funeral."

"And Faith?" said Mary.

"'Oo leaned o' Mrs. Wright, 'at wer' like a mother to her. Th' owd
father weren't theer. But Faith looked just all brokken to pieces, poor
wench."

"I'll go to her, straight away," cried Mary.

"Aye, do, Mary," said my mother, "and bring her up to Holme wi' yo'. She
wants some kitchen physic as well as other folk."

"Yo' forget yo'r ill i' bed, aunt," said Mary, "and Ben's away to
Macclesfield."

"Well, if aw amn't, aw soon shall be, if this mak' o' wark goes on. Oh!
George, tha's a deal to answer for, an' it's much if tha doesn't break
thi mother's heart afore tha's done, an' then there 'll be an end o'
poor Matty, too."

I fret a deal over John Booth's awful death and felt in a manner that it
lay at my door. Faith's sad face haunted my fevered dreams, and I
reproached myself not a little that I had not taken more care of the
lad. And yet, looking back, I do not see that I could have done other
than I did. I spoke with Mary on the matter.

"It's a bad job for Faith losing her brother like this, Mary. I doubt
she'll take it sore to heart. Her whole life seemed centred and wrapped
up in John. They might have been twins. I blame misen shocking that aw
left him to shift for hissen."

"I don't see how yo'r to blame, Ben. From all I can make out, yo'd
enough to do to look out for yersen; and it's only natural that 'Siah
an' Soldier, anyway 'Siah, our own man, should look to yo' first an'
foremost, choose how others fared."

"But I promised Faith that I'd have an eye to him."

"Well you did your best, and th' best can do no more. It's no use thee
working thissen into a fever, an' tossin' about as if tha wer' on a hot
backstone, an' kickin' th' clo'es off thee as fast as aw can put them
on, over summat at's done an' can't be undone."

"Yo'r only a Job's comforter, Mary. Aw should have thought tha'd more
feeling in thee."

"Feeling! aw've feeling enough. But it's time to talk a bit o' sense.
There's been mischief enough an' to spare o' late about feeling. It's
feeling baht sense 'at brought yo' into this mess, an' yo'r noan aht o'
th' wood yet. Happen tha'll live to envy John Booth, an' wish tha'd been
left for dead at Rawfolds i'stead o' 'scaping to find a worse fate. I
declare aw never hear a step come to th' door but my heart goes into mi
mouth an mi knees shake so aw can hardly stand. There's feeling for yo',
if yo' like. Mr. Chew says it's a hanging job for them 'at's caught."

I flushed at this you may be sure, tho' Mary only put into words the
thought that had tortured my waking hours and made my dreams hideous.
That was a subject not to be dwelt on. So I made haste to revert to
Faith.

"Aw hannot told yo' yet, Mary, that I made a promise to John, too."

"Yo seem to ha' been precious free wi thi promises."

"Nay, Mary, what's come ovver thee? Its noan like thee to turn agen them
'at's i' trouble. It wer' at Kirklees, just before we started for
Rawfolds."

And I told Mary of what had passed between John Booth and me.

"Well, what is it all leading to?" she asked.

"A've been turning things ovver i' mi mind, Mary, as aw've laid o' mi
back. Yo' see, Faith's nobbut a poor weak thing, an' fra all aw can hear
her father's awmost as bad. Don't yo' think we ought to do summat to
help her?"

"With all my heart--as how?"

"Nay, that's wheer aw'm fast. Cannot yo' suggest summat?"

"Yo' might happen ask her if she wants a home--Martha 'll mebbe be so
accommodatin' as to mak' room for her i' th' house. Martha could get
another job fast enough, an' then yo'll have Faith under yo'r own e'en,
an' it'll be little trouble to look after her then."

"The thing's preposterous, Mary. The idea of Faith scouring and, milking
and such like."

"Yo' might perhaps offer her work at the spinning."

"Why, Faith's been brought' up a lady," I cried.

"It's no more nor yo'r mother an' me does every day of our lives. But to
be sure I'm not a lady. But, perhaps, yo'd like to make Faith a present
or allow her a pension. I'm glad to see things are mending wi' yo', Ben.
Aw allus thowt yo' had nought but what yo' addled, an' that's like to be
little enough for many a month to come. But, perhaps, tha's come in for
a fortin', an' been keepin' it secret for fear o' killin' us wi' joy.
Tell us on it, Ben. Aw'll try to bear it, if it isn't too dazzling."

"Do quit thi teasing, Mary, an' talk some sense. It's no jesting matter
for poor Faith."

"And that's true enough, cousin, and I'm a wicked girl to run on so. But
yo' aggravate me so wi' thi wild schemes an' foolish talk."

"How foolish!"

"Why, how can ta help Faith? It were reight enough for poor John to
speak to yo'. I expect his heart wer' full, an' it eased him to speak to
thee. But now what can yo' do? Tha has nowt, an' half nought's nought
all th' world over."

"I could be a brother to her, Mary."

"Oh! a brother! I should ha' thowt yo'd had enough o' brotherhoods to
sicken thi for life. Aw've no patience wi' thee. There's Faith living at
Low Moor wi' her father, an' needed there, aw've little doubt, an' wi'
her hands full enough, an' now yo' mun strike up a brotherhood wi' her.
Aw suppose we'st ha' yo', as soon as yo'r up, settin' off every week end
to Low Moor to play the brother. Yo'll ha' to take yo'r sister out for
long walks aw suppose, an' to buy her rings an' keepsakes an' all that.
Yo'll find it cheaper to buy her a plain 'un to begin wi'."

"Well, and why not?" I said, getting nettled, for Mary had told me some
home truths that had been none too pleasant in the hearing and
digestion.

"And why not?" I repeated. "Faith's a sweet lass, and a good one an'
true. She's over pale an' thin mebbe, for everyone's fancy."

"Oh! beauty's in the eye of the beholder," put in Mary, tossing her
head.

"But she'd cure o' that, wi' plenty o' good milk an' fresh air such as
we han at Holme. An' aw think she leans a bit to me. Don't yo' think so
yoursen, Mary.

"Dunnot ask me. My head doesn't run on such trash. What's ta talking to
me for? Aw'm noan Faith. Yo'd soon have an answer, an' one 'at 'ud tak'
th' conceit out on thee if owt could. Ask hersen."

"Well! I happen will," I said. "Aw've a good mind."

"It's a pity to spoil a good mind then. I'd waste no time about it,
chance some'dy snaps her up. An' while th' art abaht it, yo might ask
her to come an' nurse thee, so's 'oo'll know what's afore her."

And Mary bounced out of the room in a tantrum.

The frame of mind in which she left me was certainly not one that Dr.
Dean could have desired for a feverish patient. It. was clear to me that
my own position was anything but an enviable one. Large rewards had been
offered, I knew, for such information as would lead to the conviction of
those concerned in the attack on Rawfolds, and machine breaking had been
made a capital offence. My own participation in that affair was known to
scores, and suspected by hundreds more. An incident that befel shortly
afterwards aggravated my alarm. My father was still away. A letter had
come from him, written in an obviously bad temper, complaining of the
awful state of trade and driving my mother to distraction by telling of
the trial and punishment of the Nottingham Luddites. However, I had so
far proceeded to convalescence as to leave my bed, and I was looking
forwards to being out and about in a few days, and I was turning over in
my mind the feasibility of leaving home for a few months till things
blew over a bit. I did not feel safe at home and that's the fact, and I
was on tenterhooks to put a hundred miles and more between me and
Justice Radcliffe, who was scouring the district for Luds.

I was meditating on these matters and wondering why George Mellor never
came near me even to ask after my recovery, when I heard the dog give
tongue in the yard and the sound of horses' hoofs. I managed to support
myself to the stairhead. I heard a clatter at the door, which was opened
by Martha.

"Does William Bamforth live here?" asked a voice, and there was the
pawing of a horse's hoof, the jingling of a bit-chain, the sound of one
swinging himself heavily to the ground, and the clinking of spurs.

"Does ta' mean Bill o' Ben's?" queried Martha.

"I mean William Bamforth."

"Well yo'see, there's a seet o' Bamforths i' Holme, an' four on 'em's
Bills. It'll be Bill o' Luke's yo'r wantin', or happen Bill o' Nan's
Back Side."

"I mean William Bamforth, who has a son called Ben."

"Well, he's noan at wom. He's i' Macclesfield. But aw munnot stop
talkin' here. Aw'm churnin', an' th' butter's just on th' turn. Aw'll
tell him a felly come to see him."

"Not so fast, my good woman."

"I'll trouble yo' to keep a civil tongue in yo'r head. My name's Martha.
Don't 'Good woman' me, if yo' please."

"Where's yo'r mistress?"

"'Oo's i' bed. 'Oo's ill. 'Oo's getten th' small pox, an' tha'd better
be off afore th' smell on it comes dahn stairs an' smittles thee."

"I'm sorry to seem rude, my sweet Martha. But duty's duty. I must search
yo'r house."

"If tha comes in aw'll set th' dog at thee. Here Vixen, Vixen." And
Martha called to an imaginary bitch.

There was a slight scuffle, and someone strode into the house.

"No one here anyhow. Now for upstairs." My mother had fled to her bed
and drawn the clothes about her. For me, I lay back in my chair
incapable of thought or movement. The stairs creaked under a heavy
tread. Mary stood by my side, my hand stole into hers, and she faced the
door, battle in her eyes. A big, burly trooper pushed it open, ducking
his head as he advanced over the threshold. It was Long Tom with whom I
had fought at Marsden.

"What want you here?" cried Mary. "How dare you force your way into
decent folks' house in broad day?"

"The gamesome wench that slapped my face!" cried Long Tom.

"Aye, and will slap it again if yo'r not off."

"Gently, Mary, gently," I said. "The sergeant has doubtless business
here. Your errand, sir?" I said. "You see you intrude."

"Why this beats Banagher, where the cows run barefoot!" exclaimed the
soldier. "If this isn't the youngster spoiled my beauty for me. Nay, sit
still," he went on, as I tried to rise.

"What! bandaged, too, and in the forearm. A queer treatment for small
pox."

"Sir, if you have business here, I pray you do it."

"Is your name Ben Bamforth?"

"It is."

"The son of William Bamforth?"

"His son."

"And what the devil are yo' doing here, you thundering young idiot? Why
in the name of common sense aren't you a thousand miles away if horse or
mail could carry you?"

"And what the devil are yo' doing here, you thundering young idiot? Why
in the name of common sense aren't you a thousand miles away if horse or
mail could carry you?"

"I am not accountable to you for my actions that I know of. Again, your
business?"

My mother had issued from her room in petticoat and scarlet jacket.

"Keep your distance, good woman, if its yo' have the small pox. If I
must be riddled let it be with pellets not pustules," cried the soldier,
starting back in horror.

"Oh! good Mr. Soldier. What do yo' want with our Ben? A quiet, harmless
lad, as ever lived, that never harmed a flee. I'm sure he's done nothing
wrong, and him bedfast these six months past."

Now heaven forgive you, mother!

"He played a mighty heavy fist for a sick man not three months gone,
anyhow, good dame. Nay, keep your distance. Good God! if the old lady
isn't going to kneel to me."

For my mother made as if she would throw herself at the soldier's feet.

"Mother, calm yourself," I said. "Pray, sir, you see I am in no case to
bear much talking. What is your will with me."

"I'm sorry, I'm very sorry. A man like you that ought to be fighting
Mounseer, and a proper Life Guardsman yo'd make, for sure. Well, well,
of all the tomfoolery! However, I see no help for it."

And Long Tom strode about the room in evident perplexity, muttering to
himself: "A brave lad," "a sad case," "too good for the gallows," and "I
owe the wench one, too."

I seemed to watch the working of his mind, and hope stole trembling back
into my heart.

Another too was scanning his face as anxiously as manner marks the
witness of the skies.

"And so, madam," he said, "you are his mother, and I suppose this tale
of small pox is all flam. And you, Miss, what is this long-limbed game
cock to you?"

"Oh! Sergeant," cried Mary, "I am sure you have a good heart, and are a
brave and generous man. You must not think ill of Ben for besting you
when yo' fought. It was all for me."

"I don't' think any the worse of him, pretty. I think all the better of
him. It served me right, and if I hadn't taken a drop too much, I
shouldn't have tried to steal a kiss. Tho' you will admit the
provocation." And here the gallant sergeant doffed his shako and made a
low bow to Mary, who blushed and curtsied and cast down her eyes.

"But I owe you some return, miss, for my ill manners, and as for the
trouncing, a soldier bears no malice. But you haven't told me, yet, what
is this Ben here to you? Your brother?"

"No, good sir, my cousin!"

"H'm. Aught else?"

Then did Mary catch her breath and hold me tighter by the hand; and for
a moment I could hear my own heart beat.

"He is my sweetheart, sir, an't please you. And we're to be wed when
he's well. And oh! sir, it will kill me if yo' take him from me."

"And a lucky dog he is to have so fair a bride. Well, well, I'll risk
it. But hark you, Ben Bamforth, you've had a narrow shave. I won't
enquire how you came by that bandaged arm. Perhaps I know more than yo
think. A change of air will do you good. I say no more than this: 'Next
time yo' go out of nights, take missy with you. Veils are dangerous,
especially with such eyes behind them'"--another bow to Mary--"but
masks are worse. You take me."

Indeed I did take him.

"And now I'm off. You need fear nothing from my report. But be careful
of the company you keep. A wink's as good as a nod, they say, and
there's a man in your confounded league who has no love for Ben
Bamforth."

"Good day, ma'am, and I wish you better of the small pox."

Long Tom clinked his heels together, drew himself up to the salute,
nearly knocking his head against the rafters as he did it, and turned to
go. He had reached the head of the stairs.

"Stay, sir," cried Mary, her face as red as a peony.

He looked back.

"I thought yo' wanted a kiss t'other night."

"Aye, but yo' refused me smartly."

"Well," and here Mary drooped her head and played with the corner of her
apron. "Well--I've, I've changed my mind."

And Tom laughed a great laugh and stooped over my cousin and she raised
her crimson face to his.

"Gad! Bamforth, my lad, I'd change places with you this minute and risk
Jack Ketch. Good luck and good day."

And Long Tom strode down the stairs. There were three other mounted
soldiers in the yard.

"A false scent again," we heard him say. "Only an old woman in a fever.
The bird's flown."

"It isn't often you stay upstairs so long with an old woman, sergeant!"
laughed a trooper; and they shook their reins and clattered out of the
yard, the hens scurrying with beating wings, and the ducks waddling,
quacking loudly, out of their way.

I made to thank Mary, but she fled from my room and I saw her no more
all that day, and when, the next morning, she brought me, instead of the
bowl of porridge on which I break my fast when hearty, a dish of tea and
a buttered egg, and I would have drawn her to my heart, as surely lover
may draw his mistress, Mary held aloof.

"Why, Mary, lass, surely tha'll give me a kiss now?"

"And why now?" she said, as cold as ice.

"Why, after what yo' said yesterday to Long Tom, 'at yo' an' me wer'
engaged to be wed."

"Oh! that wer' nowt. I just said it because I thowt it might help thee."

"And then, don't yo' mind, Mary, that neet after I'd fought Long Tom at
Marsden--how yo' come behind th' chair an' kissed me."

"Well, what o' that?"

"Dost ta mean to say, after that, tha cares nowt about me more nor
common?"

"It it comes to that, Ben, didn't yo' see me do much th' same wi Long
Tom yesterday?"

"In truth, I did, Mary. And I think it was unnecessary, not to say
unmaidenly."

"Thank yo', Ben. I'll mind my manners better i' future. But at least yo'
mun see that yo' munnot argy from what aw did when yo'r eye wer' blacked
i' Marsden; for bi the same token Long Tom might leap to conclusions.
And heigh-ho! Long Tom's a proper sort o' man, and I'm awmost stalled o'
Sloughit. Sup thi tea, Ben, afore it gets cold, an' if tha'rt in such a
hurry to get wed, remember yo'r more nor hauf promised to Faith Booth."

Long Tom was true to his word. Justice Radcliffe was hot on the trail of
the Luddites. The patrols were more active than ever, and first one and
then another was summoned to Milnsbridge House and questioned keenly as
to his doings, but for a time nothing came of all this questioning,
except that there grew up among the Luds an uneasy feeling that there
was a tell-tale in their midst. I lived in daily dread of a visit from
Justice Radcliffe, but I never came across him but once. It was about
this time, when I was just beginning to get about a bit, my father and
'Siah being back from the markets, and I supposed to be returned with
them, I was going through Milnsbridge when I was aware of Mr. Radcliffe
on horseback riding towards me, a handsome hearty man as ever you saw in
your life. "A fine old English gentleman," his friends all called him.
He drew rein, and at his motion I stood by his saddle.

"Ben Bamforth of Holme, if I mistake not?" he questioned.

"At your service, sir," I said, with confidence in my voice and little
in my heart.

"Good Mr. Bamforth, the clothier's son.

"The same, sir,--his only son."

"And following his trade, I hear."

"What there is of it, sir."

"A worthy man is your father, Master Bamforth, and a loyal subject of
His Majesty. You have been sick of late they say."

Who said? I wondered but dared not ask, so muttered:

"Nowt to speak on, I'm all right now."

"Still yo' must be careful. Who's your doctor?"

"Dr. Dean."

"What, my good friend Dean? The sly dog! Still a patient's a
patient"--this rather to himself than to me. "And has Dr. Dean said
nothing to you about avoiding the night air for a time?"

"I don't know that he has, your worship."

"Well tell him you've seen me, and that my advice is that yo' keep in
doors these spring nights, fine or dark, and ask him if he doesn't agree
with me."

"It is unnecessary, sir, I am entirely of that opinion myself."

"Come that's good hearing. Mind you stick to it. And, hark ye, thank God
as long as you live that you'd a good father before yo' and that Justice
Radcliffe doesn't give heed to every idle tale that's brought to him."

And he touched his hat as I uncovered and bent my head to him, for I
knew all our precautions had been in vain, and that Justice Radcliffe
had in his keeping a secret that could send me to the gallows.

But who had betrayed me?



CHAPTER X.

I HAVE told how I met Justice Radcliffe and what he said to me. That was
after I was better and about. But many things had happened before that,
of which I have yet to tell, and I scarce know how to frame the telling.
Events so crowded one on the heels of the other that it is difficult to
write of them connectedly and in order.

It was Tuesday, April 28th, something more than a fortnight after the
affair at Rawfolds, and I still kept my room but not my bed. I had seen
nothing all this time of my cousin George, and took it hard that he
should not have come near me, but found excuses for him in the thought
that perhaps he feared to bring notice on our house by being seen to
visit it. Martha that night had gone into the village to meet the
carrier's cart by which my mother expected sundry things that she had
ordered from Huddersfield. It drew late, and my mother began to fidget
and to worrit about the difficulty of getting a servant that would not
tarry to gossip whenever sent an errand and the readiness with which
young women lent themselves to gallivanting, so different from what it
was when she was a girl, when, she gave Mary and me to understand, a
self-respecting maid entrenched herself in a barricade of frigid reserve
that only the most intrepid, the most persistent and the most respectful
approaches could surmount. About nine o'clock, however, Martha came
home, and my mother called to her to come upstairs to give an account of
herself, and presently we heard her panting up the steps. She dropped
into the first chair she came to--

"Oh! my poor side," she gasped. "That broo 'll be the death on me yet.
Such a pain as awn got an' sich a gettin' up th' hill as never wor, an'
th' pack hauf as heavy agen as ever it had used to be, an' me awmost
running, all th' way for fear sum'dy sud be afore me an' no one to oppen
th' door to 'em. Aw do believe aw'st faint." And indeed Martha was in a
very bad way.

"If yo' didn't stop talkin' wi' every young felly tha' met at's nowt
better to do nor be tittle-tattlin' wi' ony idle wench he meets, tha
could tak' thi time an' not come home an hour late an' lookin' as if
tha'd been rolled i' th' hedge bottom, a sight not fit to be seen in a
decent house," said my mother severely.

"Oh! Mrs. Bamforth, God forgive yo' those words. Yo'll live to repent
'em, an' yo'll never die easy till yo'n said so, an' me that keeps misen
respectable tho' sore tempted."

Now if ever kindly Nature laboured to shield a helpless virgin from the
craft and allurements of man, it had so laboured on behalf of honest
Martha.

"But p'r'aps yo' dunnot want to be hearing th' news, an' aw'm sure aw
can do wi' all th' wind awn got i'stead o' was-tin' it wheer its noan
wanted. So aw'll just put th' shop stuff away an' yo'll happen count
yo'r change an' I'st go to bed, for it's little supper aw'st want to
neet or for mony a neet to come, if we live to see another neet. But yo'
needn't be so sure o' that. It's more nor likely we'st all be murdered
i' our beds, an' th' mester and 'Siah away when they're most wanted."

"What is it's upset yo', Martha?" asked Mary, giving Martha a little
cold tea which had been left in the pot.

"It's about Edmund Eastwood."

"What o' Slough'it? What on him?" asked my mother. "I'll lay he's had a
stroke. Aw told their Lucy only th' last time aw seed her he wor puttin'
on flesh a deal too fast for a man o' his years."

"Well it's noan a stroke, so tha'rt off thi horse this time, missus,
choose how, an' so's Eastwood too, come to that."

"Don't be so aggravating, Martha," said I. "If you've ought to tell,
let's hear it."

"Well, there's all maks o' tales dahn i' th' village, an' aw stopped to
get th' reights on it, if aw could, for aw thowt it wer' no use bringing
hauf a tale, an' it's little thanks aw get for my trouble. But there's
justice i' Heaven, that's one comfort, for there's little on earth,
certain sure. But as aw wer' sayin', Eastwood wer' comin' fra' th'
market, an' they do say he rode hard, for he wer' trying to catch up wi'
Horsfall o' Ottiwells."

"Aye, they oft rode home together," I put in.

"Weel, they'll nivver ride home together again if all they sen be true,"
continued Martha. "Eastwood had just getten sight o' Horsfall opposite
Radcliffe's Plantation, when bang coom a shot out o' th' wood, an' he
seed, they say, a felly jump on top o' th' wall an' wave his arms. An'
Horsfall fell off his horse just as Eastwood wer riding up."

"Dead?" I gasped.

"Who said he wor dead? Noa, but as good as dead by all accounts.
Eastwood's horse swerved at him as he ligged across th' road, an' Edmund
wer thrown off into th' road. But he sammed hissen up an' bent ovver
Horsfall, an' a lad caught th' mare up th' road as it wer' makin' for
home as if Owd Harry wer' behind it, as he might be for owt aw can tell.
But Eastwood nivver stayed for th' mare. He set off for Huddersfield as
fast as he could split to fot a doctor."

"And Mr. Horsfall?"

"They carried him to th' Warrener, an' in a bit Eastwood comes back in
th' gig wi' Dr. Houghton fra Huddersfield, they say i' a hand gallop an'
covered wi 'sweat. Th' doctor jumps out o' th' trap an' runs into th'
inn an' Eastwood wer' following him. But th' doctor comes running out
again. He'd left some on his tools behind him."

"Aye, aye, most haste least speed," from my mother.

"And th' lad come up wi' Eastwood's horse, an' he up into th' saddle an'
galloped off to th' town helter-skelter, an' reight at th' corner o' th'
churchyard, just as if th' sensible crittur knew that were where th'
rider wer' bun for, it threw him agean. They sen he's twisted his
innards, an' they do say it's a toss up which 'll go first, him or
Horsfall."

"What! is Mr. Horsfall so badly hit?"

"Aye, he's at th' Warrener. They cannot move him wom, and Mr. Scott o'
Woodsome's theer to tak' his dying speech an' confession."

"Deposition," I corrected.

"Well, it's th' same thing, an' aw'm no scholar to crack on. An' little
use learnin' is, it seems to me, if folk cannot keep theirsen out o'
such mullocks as this. It's a mercy 'Siah's away, say I, for if they can
they'll put it on to th' poor folk, an' let their betters go scot free,
tho' its them as puts 'em up to it."

I did not sleep a wink that night. Horsfall shot dead! A man done to
death in broad daylight by a shot from an assassin lurking behind a
wall! It comes home to you when you know the man, when you know well the
very spot on which he fell, when you can see in your mind's eye the
murderers crouching behind the stones of a wall on which you have rested
in many a homeward walk. How much more does it touch you when, as you
ponder this picture of these crouched and waiting men, a face starts
forth, with murder in its eyes, and the face is that of one you have
loved and leaned on! I could not be certain, but I felt the hand of
George Mellor was in this awful deed, and every instinct of manliness,
of fair play, of humanity, rose up within, me and cried shame on the
bloody deed. I remembered what George had said the night Horsfall had
struck him with his riding-whip. I knew how his proud spirit must have
chafed at our repulse at Rawfolds. But murder! oh it is an ugly thing.
To stand up in fair fight, to pit strength against strength, craft
against craft, to stake limb for limb, life for life, why, that, who
shall cry fie upon. But to steal upon your foe in the dark, to stab in
the back, to smite him unawares, to speed him unsummoned and unfit to
judgment--there is no cause so righteous as to redeem an act so
dastard. And that George, so frank, so full of sunshine and gay candour,
should do this cowardly deed, passed comprehension. And yet who of all
the others would dare? And if the thing had to be done, was George one
to leave to others what he shrank from doing himself?

It was a night of torture. I looked back on the night I had passed in
the barn after the fight at Rawfolds, and it seemed by comparison a
night of restful bliss. Once, about midnight, I thought I heard the
rattle of a pebble against the window pane. I stole softly out of bed
and raised the window. But all was still around, and not far away in the
little village a widow mourned a murdered husband and anguished hearts
cried to heaven for just revenge.

After breakfast my mother set off to the village in quest of news. Work
was out of the question. Mary busied herself about the house, and I
tried to fix my mind upon straightening the books, which, after a
fashion, it was my duty to keep. Alas! the invoices to be made out were
few and slight, and an hour or so a week was enough for all the
accountancy our business called for.

To me, thus engaged, tho' with wandering thoughts, came Martha, care
upon her brow and secrecy in her gait.

"There's som'b'dy in th' shippen wants thee, Ben. Oh! dunnot let Mary
know. He doesn't want any but thee to know he's here."

"Who is it?" I said beneath my breath. "It's him," said Martha, and
nodded to me significantly.

"George?"

"Aye, George."

Just then Mary came out of the parlour with a duster in her hand, and
I made pretence to be wrapt up in my ledger. Martha turned to go.

"What are yo' two whispering about?" Mary said suspiciously.

"Oh, nought," said Martha.

"Summot an' nought," I said, for Mary kept looking from one to the
other.

"I don't believe you, Ben. What's agate? oh! Ben, don't trifle wi' me
this morn for aw feel as if th' world were coming to an end, and more
mysteries and horrors will drive me mad."

I reflected. If George were indeed anything to Mary, who had so much
right to see him now as she? Anyway the day had gone by for me to be
mixed up with any more secrets.

"There's George in th' mistal, Mary, he wants to see me by misen."

"Tell George Mellor to come in here and show himself like, a man," cried
Mary. "Go this minute, Martha, and bid him come to his aunt's house as a
man should come. Tell him, I, Mary, say so." And Martha went.

I rose from the little desk at which I sat and stood upon the hearth.
Mary stood by my side, her face pale, her eyes lustrous, her breath
coming short. The door opened slowly, and George came in. My God! I see
him yet! I had passed a sleepless night, but George looked as if he had
known no sleep for weeks. His face was white and drawn. His eyes were
deep sunk in his head, and even by this they had a hunted shifting
look--and when they looked at you, which by rare times they did, they
seemed as tho' they asked a question and feared the answer. His
neckchief was all awry, his boots clay covered, his breeches soiled, his
hands were stained with dirt and torn with thorns, and his whole body
seemed bent and unstrung. He advanced but two uncertain paces into the
house. I stood my stand upon the hearth. George half lifted his hand to
meet mine. For the life of me I could not raise my own, and words died
from my lips. And Mary moved closer to my side, and half her figure drew
behind me.

"What ta, Ben?" and George moaned and flung up his arms and sank upon a
chair by the little round table in the kitchen centre and bowed his head
on his arms and great sobs shook his frame.

"Leave us, Mary," I said very soft.

"I winna, aw'st see it aat. Tha't too soft, Ben."

I shaped to lay my hand on George's shoulder, but even as I raised my
arm the thought of the murdered man came like a shock at me again, and I
stood stiff and still once more. The convulsion passed, and George
lifted his face.

"Tha knows all, Ben?"

"All I fear, George."

"And tha flings me off?"

"I fling thee off."

The angry colour came to his face, some of the old fire to his eye. He
sprang to his feet, something of a man once more.

"And is this thi trust and this thi loyalty; hast ta forgotten thi oath,
Ben?"

"I have forgotten nought, George."

"And yo' desert the Luds? Our greatest enemy lies low. I have struck the
blow that others feared to strike, and terror palsies the oppressors of
the poor. And in the supreme hour of our triumph you draw back?"

"I draw back."

"You brave the consequences of your broken oath, you earn for yourself
the hatred of the poor, the obloquy and the doom of the traitor?"

"I brave them."

"Then out upon you, Ben Bamforth, for a false and perjured knave. The
hour of trial and of danger has come, and it finds thee false. Oh!
bitter the day and cursed the hour I took yo' to my heart, and bitter
the rue thou'st sup for this. And yo' Mary, I've a word to say to yo'.
But cannot I speak to thee alone?"

I made as tho' to leave the house, but Mary stayed me by a touch.

"Say what yo' have to say before Ben. Yo' can have nought to say to me
he cannot hear."

"Nay I care not if tha does'na. He may listen if tha likes. All th'
world may know for me. It has to be said, as well now as another time,
tho' it's a rum courting to be sure. Tha knows aw love thee, Mary; tha
knows aw've sought thee and only thee this many a month back?"

"I know yo've said so, George."

"And yo' did not say me nay. Yo' bid me bide my time, said yo' did not
know yor own mind, that yo' were ower young to think o' such things yet,
and put me off. But tha did not send me away wi'out hope, Mary, and I
thought that in the bottom of your heart there was a tiny seedling that
in time would flower to love."

"And so it might have done, George, but when it was a tender plant, a
cold frost came and nipped it."

"I cannot follow yo', Mary, I am distraught in mind. All this night I
have wandered the fields and in the lanes. A hundred times I have set my
face over the hills to leave this cursed country."

"And your work behind you!" I put in, but he heeded me not.

"But the thought of you, Mary, held me back. I must know your heart,
your mind to me. If yo' will be mine, if yo' will give me your word to
wed me in quieter days, I will quit this work. Things will quieten
themselves. A month or two and the Luddites will be forgotten. Our
secrets are well kept. The Government will be only too glad to let
sleeping dogs lie, and in another country, under another sky under the
flag of the free Republic that has spurned the fetters of its English
mother, you and I will seek fortune, hand-in-hand."

"There is blood upon your hand, George Mellor. Mine it shall never clasp
again."

"So be it I need not stoop to woo too humbly. My star is o'ercast now,
but a day shall come when yo' will regret the hour yo' spurned George
Mellor's love. And yo! Ben Bamforth, traitor to your friend's confided
love," . . . . and he turned upon me fiercely with flashing eye and
clenched fist, and all his wrath surged to his lips and he would have
gladly poured it out on me.

"Nay, George, I have not said my say," Mary broke in. "Yo' have told me
yo' loved me, and when first I knew you I think I could have been easy
won to love. But you were here when Ben Walker told how Long Tom had
outraged me. Yo' heard every word he said, and I grant yo' you talked
big. But what did you do? The girl yo' woo'd for your bride told her
tale, and yo'--yo' made a speech and went home to bed, leaving to
another arm to wreak the punishment you only threatened. My love, such
as it was, died that night, that was the icy breath that killed it, and
from that night I have almost loathed myself that ever I wasted a tender
thought on you. But go, leave this house, your mind should be on other
things than love. I ask no questions. But if my fears are true, it is of
making your peace with an offended Maker you should be thinking, and
crying for mercy rather than suing for love."

"You have had your answer, George," I said, as Mary hastened from the
room leaving us confronting each other.

"Aye, I have had my answer. Yo' have stolen my love from me, yo'r
desertion will wreck our cause, and now, finish what tha has begun, go
to Justice Radcliffe, tell him George Mellor did not sleep at his
father's house last night, put the bloodhounds of the law upon my track,
and when tha draws the price of blood make a merry wedding for thissen
an' th' lass tha's stolen to lay her head upon thi false an' perjured
heart!"

And he waxed me off as I strode towards him, and made with quick step
across the yard, and for many months I saw George Mellor no more.

Horsfall's death had an effect just the opposite to that expected by the
Luds. It did not bring the masters to their knees: on the contrary it
hardened and united them. It did not embolden the Luddites; rather they
became alarmed at their own extremes. A reward was offered for the
discovery of those concerned in the attack on Rawfolds, and a large sum,
three thousand pounds, if my memory serves me, was put together by the
millowners and given to Mr. Cartwright to mend his windows and to reward
his pluck. Another reward, of two thousand pounds, was offered by the
Government to anyone, not the actual murderer, who should betray to
justice those who had shot Mr. Horsfall. Justice Radcliffe never rested.
The least rumour that reached his ear was sufficient to justify an
arrest, and no one knew when it would be his turn to be summoned to
Milnsbridge House and have an ugly half-hour in the sweating room where
the magistrate examined the men, women and children he hauled before
him. I do not know what warrant Justice Radcliffe had for such
examinations--probably none. But, then, how were ignorant folk, half
frightened out of their wits, to know this; or if they knew it, how was
their knowledge to serve them? To refuse to answer would be construed as
a sure sign of guilty knowledge, if not of actual partnership: so people
made themselves as gaumless as they could, and when driven into a corner
lied like blacks.

The manufacturers who felt themselves or their goods in danger took
heart. All eyes at this time were fixed on Marsden. Enoch and James
Taylor, who made the new cropping frames, were looked upon as marked
men, and Woodbottom mill was fortified as if for a siege; soldiers
sleeping in the mill at night.

"Arthur Hirst's a main clever chap," said 'Siah, with unwilling
admiration.

Arthur Hirst was the engineer at Woodbottom.

"How so, 'Siah?" I asked.

"Why mon he's laid a trap for th' Luds 'at 'll give 'em what for, if
they pay a visit to th' Bottom. It's like th' owd nominy, 'walk into my
garden said th' arrunder to th' flea.'"

"What's the' trap, 'Si?"

"Why he leaves a door open that leads ovver th' wheel race; an' there's
a false flure ovver th' race, an' if anybody wer' to walk ovver it, it
'ud give way an' souse into th' race he'd go. Then up wi' t' shuttle, in
with th' watter, an' in a jiffy th' wheel 'ud be turnin' an'
hauf-a-dozen Luds turnin' wi' it, if so be as they be so obligin' as to
walk into th' trap."

But no one did. Woodbottom was not attacked. The midnight raids became
rare, and then ceased, and people went about saying the power of the
Luds was broken and that we should hear no more of them. For my part I
asked for nothing better.

Mary was true to her promise. She went to Low Moor and returned with
Faith, a paler, thinner, sadder Faith. And Mary was very kind to her,
very gentle with her, which surprised me not a little, for more than
once she had been somewhat waspish whenever I had spoken of John's
sister. But all that was past and over, and Mary and Faith seemed as
thick as thieves. They slept in the same bed, and would go about the
place with arms about each other's waists--a pretty picture: Mary in
her blue print, with rosy cheeks and plump figure, and dancing eye and
saucy speech; Faith in a plain close fitting dress of some black stuff,
pale and pensive, with many a sigh and at times a tear of chastened
sorrow when her mind fled back to the brother she had lost.

Of George Mellor we never spoke, though he was not long absent from the
minds of any one of us. Mary put me on my guard.

"Yo' thought, Ben, 'at Faith wer' sweet on yo'!"

I made haste to disclaim the impeachment.

"Now it's no use lying, Ben, yo' six feet o' vanity that ye' are. An'
what's more yo' were wi'in an ace o' bein' i' love wi' her."

I vowed by all my gods that this was false.

"Oh, yo' may swear as hard as yo' like; but aw know ye', Ben. Yo'd
gotten into yo'r head 'at it wer' yo'r mission i' life to look after
folk i' general an' they'd nowt to do but look ailin' an' pinin' as if
they couldn't stick up for theirsen, an' yo' wer' ready to tak' them an'
their trouble on them big shoulders o' yo'rn. That wer' th' way thi
vanity showed itsen."

"I was sorry for Faith, Mary. But bein' sorry an bein' i' love 's two
different things."

"Pity's o' kin to love," quoted Mary. "An' aw tell ye', wi' precious
little encouragement an' th' chapter o' accidents helpin', yo'd ha' been
sprawling at Faith's little feet, an 'ud ha' gone to yo'r grave
believin' yo'd loved her sin' first yo' set eyes on her."

"And who was it taught me the difference atween love and pity, Mary?" I
asked.

"How should I know and why should I care quoth Mary.

"No voice has ever told me, Mary, but the voice of my own heart; no
words that maid e'er spoke, but a pair of arms around my neck and a
maid's kiss upon my brow."

"Then if that's all yo'r warrant, I'd 'vise yo' not to be over certain
on it. There's many a slip 'twixt the cup 'an the lip, an' a woman
doesn't like a felly to be too sure."

"Nay, if yo'd have me plead on," I began and asked nothing better than
to say my say; but Mary had ever a way of slipping from my grasp.

"Do yo' think I've nowt better to do nor listenin' to this nonsense? We
wer' talkin' about Faith, an' how we wandered off aw' cannot tell."

"Well what of Faith?"

"Aw tell yo', Ben, Faith thought more of George Mellor's little finger
nor of all yo'r big body. Aye an' still thinks. He's her hero. Her
brother stuffed her head wi' such a pack o' nonsense that she thinks
George the finest man that ever lived, and yo' not much better nor a
coward for deserting him. She frets because he doesn't come here, and
there's no tellin' what mak' o' folly her silly fancy mayn't lead her
to."

"But George cares nowt for her," I said.

"What's that to do wi' it? Let a felly go sighing an' pinin' after a
wench--an' it's long odds she'll laugh i' his long face. Let him seem
beyond her reach an' it's just as likely she'll break her heart longing
for him."

"Does she know about Horsfall?"

"Of course she does."

"What, all?"

"Aye, all. I took care she should."

"Well?"

"Well, she doesn't believe a word of it."



CHAPTER XI.

MAY came, sweet, fair and smiling. The crops bade fair to be good, and
we looked forward to hay-making time with every assurance of a rich
harvest. Everything was quiet as quiet could be. Of George I saw nothing
at all. True I did not seek him, rather I shrank from meeting him. Our
household settled down into its accustomed ways, and, such is the
elasticity of the human mind, I began to look back upon the winter
months as a troubled dream, only an occasional twinge in my right arm
giving me a sharp reminder of the days I slung a hammer and pounded at
the massive door of Rawfolds. I was wondrous happy. Health returned to
my frame like the sap to the branch, and my heart was filled with all
the sweet delight of love given and returned. There was no troth
plighted as yet between Mary and me, but there grew up between us an
unspoken acknowledgment of our love that bettered words. Faith was still
with us, and as the weeks grew to months her melancholy melted away and
a pensive content took its place. You did not find her singing like a
lark, carolling the live-long day, as you did Mary, but there was about
her an air of serene restfulness and calm that won all our hearts. With
Mr. Webster she was an especial favourite, and she began, to his great
delight, to teach a class in the Sunday school at Powle Moor. Faith was
a rare scholar, tho' not, of course, learned in foreign tongues like
John had been. She could write a beautiful hand and draw beautiful
designs of birds and flowers and faces, which she wove in a marvellous
way into the flourishes in her copy-books. And her figures and summing
were like print. She taught the girls at the Powle to read and write,
and she taught them so well that the boys rose in revolt and demanded
that they too should join Miss Booth's class. It was a sight to see her
leaving chapel of a Sunday afternoon. The scholars, boys and girls both,
would wait till service was done that they might walk homewards with
Miss Faith, and it was as sweet a sight as ever gladdened the eye of man
to see her crossing the fields by the narrow lanes through the waving,
nodding, rustling grass, that now began to sigh its own dirge, for
hay-time drew near, a crowd of children in her train, a toddling urchin
on either side clutching with chubby hand the folds of her skirt, and an
advanced guard of sturdy lads marching on in front prepared to face
imaginary lions and tigers in defence of their beloved teacher. Little
Joe Gledhill and Jim Sugden fought a battle royal on Wimberlee because
Faith had kissed Joe, whereas she had only given a lollipop to Jim, and
on the strength of the kiss Joe went about bragging that when he was a
man he should wed Faith and live happy ever after, the envy of all the
boys in Slaithwaite, Lingards and Outlane.

Wonders never cease. At this time Soldier Jack turned religious, and
began to be very constant in his attendance at Powle Moor, and there was
much rejoicing in the camp of the godly over this brand plucked from the
burning. Of a surety there is more rejoicing over one sinner that is
saved than over ninety and nine righteous men. And Jack announced his
resolve to forswear sack and live cleanly. He took a little cottage in
the village, which he minded himself, and it was a picture of
cleanliness, tho' it was not over stocked with furniture. You should
have seen Jack polishing his fender, pipe-claying he called it.

There was a stormy scene, folk said, between him and Widow Walker, the
buxom landlady of the Black Bull, the day Jack paid his last shot and
announced his resolve to frequent that hostelry no more. The lady wept
and stormed and even threatened Jack with the terrors of the law; but
Jack was adamant.

"Dost think awn goin' to tak' up wi' that owd swill-tub's leavin's?"
Jack asked when I questioned him as to his rupture with the hostess of
the Black Bull.

"Yo' used to crack on her famous," I replied. "Ah! that wer' i' mi salat
days, Ben, an' aw'll thank yo' not to throw them days of darkness i' mi
face."

"But what's converted yo, Soldier?" I asked.

"Parson Webster."

"H...m"

"Aye, tha may h...m, that's ever the way wi' scoffer's an' unbelievers.
Aw tell yo' th' little man's getten th' reight end o' th' stick an' owd
Chew at th' church isn't fit to fasten th' latchet o' his shoes, as th'
Book says: an' if tha thinks contrariwise I'll feight thee for it big as
tha art."

"That's what they call muscular Christianity," I said.

"An' a very good sort, too," quoth Jack.

Anyhow a great change had undoubtedly come over the man, and none of us
was surprised when he broached to my father and mother his schemes for
establishing himself in life.

"It's about time, Mrs. Bamforth, aw settled dahn. Aw've had mi fling an'
sown mi wild oats, an' nah it's time aw turned mi hand to a reg'lar
job."

"Yo' should get wed," said my mother, very promptly.

"Would yo' reilly advise me so, maam?" asked Jack.

"Indeed aw should an' th' sooner the better."

"Aw dunnot see as how I can afford."

"Oh, fiddlesticks, what 'll keep one 'll keep two, an' God never sends
mouths but he sends meat."

"That's cheering anyhow. But don't yo' think awm too old, Mrs.
Bamforth?"

"An' what age may yo' be, if aw may make so bold?"

"Well yo' see awm noan rightly sure. But put it at forty-two or three,
an' a gamey leg to boot."

"Limps dunnot run i' fam'lies," replied my mother with conviction.
"There was that lad o' Crowthers 'at fell off a scaffold twenty foot
high an' had to be taken to th' 'Firmary at Leeds, an' came back wi'out
his arm an' went about wi' th' left sleeve o' his jacket pinned across
his chest an' wed Kerenhappuch Hoyle, which aw shall allers say were no
name to give a Christian woman, tho' Mr. Webster did say it meant 'the
horn of beauty': an' yet when th' first child came, an' Kerenhappuch
that anxious as never was an' not knowing for certain whether to mak th'
long clo'es wi' one sleeve or two, it had two as fine arms as ever yo'd
wish to see on a babe. So it's clear arms isn't like squints, which it's
well known run i' families same as bald heads, an' it stan's to reason
if arms dunnot legs winnot, not to name a bit of a limp."

"That seems to settle it," admitted Jack.

"An' han yo' fixed yo'r mind on anyone particler, Jack? Awm sure yo'n
ta'en time enough, an' reason enough too you should. Marry i' haste an'
repent at leisure's God's truth, an' aw've no patience wi' young folk
weddin' 'at could awmost go to th' hedge an' see their nippins."

"Nay, ma'am," said the foxy warrior, "In so weighty a matter aw thowt it
best to seek advice, and who can counsel me better nor yo'rsen."

"Aw thank yo' for the compliment, Soldier, Aw will say that it's th'
army for puttin' a polish on a man if he do get but little moss. All i'
good time for th' moss. An yo'll be lookin' maybe for a tidy body wi'
summot o' her own put bye. A decent, quiet, God-fearing, steady woman,
that could manage a house an' make yo' comfortable. There's Betty Lumb,
now, o' th' Town End. She's pretty warm, I'll be bun, for she spends
nowt."

"Why she's forty, ma'am, if she's a month, an' wi' a tongue like a
flail."

"An' what age might yo' be thinkin' on, Soldier?" asked my mother with
asperity, suspicion in her voice.

"Well, aw haven't fixed to a year or two, but she mun be younger nor
that. Else what about discipline, ma'am, what about discipline?
'Discipline must be maintained,' the Duke always said, and, zounds, I
agree with him."

And Jack made his escape leaving my mother the agreeable task of turning
over in her mind all the single women of middle age for miles around,
weighing their merits and by no means unmindful of their failings.

With my father Jack's converse was on sterner matters. It seemed the
Soldier was not without a little money laid by, and he was anxious to
engage his modest capital in some enterprise in which his want of
experience, would not be fatal. Farming he rejected with little
consideration as being too tame a pursuit, tho' Mr. Webster, who was
also taken into council, pointed out the excellency of beating the sword
into a plowshare and the spear into a pruning hook.

Jack's doubts were, as often happens to man, rather solved for him than
by him. Say what folk will, Rawfolds was not attacked nor Horsfall shot
in vain. Those two events pleaded harder with our masters in Parliament
than Mr. Brougham. They were arguments that could not be resisted. In
June of that year, on the 18th to be exact, the Orders in Council were
repealed, and our Valley and all the West Riding was soon busy with the
stir of a revived industry. It was as tho' we breathed free after the
weight and pressure of a long nightmare. The markets briskened at once,
as tho' under a fairy's touch. Men went about shaking each other by the
hand and with glad smiles upon their faces and in their eyes. The idle
looms began to click, the roads were again busy as of yore with the
traffic of great waggons departing laden and returning empty of their
load. The canal began to be used freely for the carriage of piles of
pieces. We could not make goods fast enough. The ports were once more
open, and it seemed as if, all the world over, the nations were crying
for our goods. It was as if the waters of commerce, frozen and banked
up, had been thawed by a sudden heat and hounded forth in tumultuous
volume. The church bells all over the Riding rang out the glad news. The
manufacturers of our parts had a great dinner at the Cherry Tree and
many another hostelry besides, and for the first time in my life and the
last, I saw my father overcome by strong waters. He held down his head
many a day at after before the awful face of my mother.

We shared in this great outburst of glorious sunshine. Our house was
filled with pieces that my mother had vowed could have no other end than
to be eaten by moths and rats. They found now a ready market, and the
cry was still for more. We were all as busy as Thropp's wife from
morning till night. I could not be spared from my own loom and from the
warping and seeing to the bunting and country work. And so it came about
that Jack went with my father on one of his rounds and proved himself so
apt at cozening customers and became so great a favourite with the
farmers' wives that came to buy suit lengths, that he was in time deemed
fit to be trusted with a load on his own account. He bought a horse and
waggon, established a round of his own, where he wouldn't clash with us,
purchased his goods for the most part of us, and in a smallish way began
to build a business, and laid the foundations of a thriving trade for
his son and his son's son.

But with it all Soldier ever delighted to spend his nights at Holme and
his Sundays at Powle Moor. I soon found he wanted none of my company. He
had eyes only for Faith. He would talk to Faith by the hour of the
singular virtues and the unparalleled learning of poor John, and that
was a theme Faith never wearied of. What a saint, what a hero, what a
philosopher they made of him between them! I only hope Jack believed
half of what he said: else, there was a heavy account scoring against
him somewhere.

We were all very happy during those months of summer and early autumn,
lulled in a false security. We might have known that sooner or later the
authorities were bound to get the information for which they never
ceased to seek. In the middle of October it was rumoured in the market
that George Mellor and Ben Walker had been arrested by Justice
Radcliffe, but after a few hours detention had been released for lack of
evidence. I breathed freely after this, and itched to go to George and
hear all he had to tell. But I had to bite my thumb and wait, for, apart
altogether from the coolness between George and me, it would never have
done to be seen in his company just then. Still it was something to know
that the police could make out no case against him and Walker, and we
all felt that was more than a little in our favour. Then, like a bolt
from the blue, came a piece of news in the "Leeds Mercury." Mr. Webster
was the first to tell us of it, for we did not, at Holme, see the daily
paper till after Mr. Mellor the schoolmaster had done with it, he and my
father joining at the cost of it. I have the paper still before me as I
write, tho' it is now yellow with age and hangs together very loosely
and it is worn through at the creases. I may as well copy out what Mr.
Webster read to us, and you may judge for yourself what a flustration it
threw us into:

"A man has been taken up and examined by that indefatigable magistrate,
Joseph Radcliffe, Esq., and has given the most complete and satisfactory
evidence of the murder of Mr. Horsfall. The villains accused have been
frequently examined before."--I never heard of but once--"but have
always been discharged for want of sufficient evidence. The man charged
behaved with the greatest effrontery till he saw the informer, when he
changed colour and gasped for breath. When he came out of the room after
hearing, the informer's evidence, he exclaimed 'Damn that fellow, he has
done me.' It appears that this man and another have been the chief in
all the disgraceful transactions that have occurred in this part of the
country, especially at Rawfolds. This will lead to many more
apprehensions."

When he had read this aloud Mr. Webster handed the paper to me, and I
read the bit he pointed out to me again and again, for I was too stunned
to take the sense of it in at first. The paragraph referred to the
murderers of Mr. Horsfall. Well, I was clear of that at all events. You
see my first thoughts were of myself and my own neck. It is no use
pretending to be different from what I am, and I may as well confess
that my first feeling was one of relief that the murderers of Mr.
Horsfall only were indicated by the paragraph. But the feeling was
short-lived. If Walker, for of course it must be Walker, it never
entered my mind to question that, if Walker had told about the murder of
Horsfall, would he hold his tongue about other matters. And if he told
about the doings at Rawfolds, how many weeks purchase was my life worth.
"This will lead to many more apprehensions." These words stood out and
stared me in the face, and I broke out into a cold sweat and my hand
trembled as I gave the paper back to Mr. Webster.

What was to be done? My father was all for flight, but Mr. Webster
thought that would be of little use, for, said he, six feet two are not
so easy hid as three feet one. He should like to see Ben Walker's
father, who was or had been one of his deacons, and learn from him the
exact truth of the matter. But he was fearful lest he should bungle the
business, being as he said little used to the subtleties of the law and
having a fatal habit of being prodigal in the matter of the truth.

"There's Soldier," said my father, who had unbounded confidence in our
new foreman's resources, and who also probably felt that whatever qualms
Jack might feel about parsimony in the matter in which the parson was
prodigal he would be able to overcome.

"But Jack's in it knee deep," I objected.

"He'll wade out," said my father. And Jack was fetched from the
scourhole, and came in with his arms bare and sweating from the steam,
and smelling abominably of lant.

The paragraph was read to him.

"Phew! so George is nabbed. Well he'll noan split aw hope."

"It appears that the man and another have been the chief in all the
disgraceful transactions that have occurred in this part of the country,
especially at Rawfolds' read Mr. Webster again. 'The man and
another...especially at Rawfolds?' You see the betrayal has not been
confined to the murder of that unfortunate but headstrong man--'The man
and another.' Who can the other be?"

I looked at Soldier and Soldier looked at me.

"That'll be me," said Jack.

"Nay, me," I said

And the silence of dismay fell upon us all.

"Nay," said the good parson at length, and never did dying absolution
from priestly lips bring more comfort to a penitent--"Nay, that can
hardly be. This paper was published in Leeds yesterday morning. The
information must have been in the possession of Mr. Radcliffe for some
days. If either of you had been implicated you would have been under
arrest ere this."

I breathed again.

"Well, Jack, what do yo' say?" asked my father.

"Say? Well aw say I'm noan goin' to be kept on th' tenterhooks. Awm
goin' to know all at is to be known. I'm goin' to reconnoitre. They
can't hang me for a spy, any road, an' that's what they nearly did in
Spain. Just yo' cower quiet, Ben. I'm off to th' Brig. There'll be more
known there. Just you leave it to me; an' I'll be back wi' my budget bi
th' afternoon drinkin."

And Jack set off without parley, and left us to our anxieties.

He was back by four o'clock. Mr. Webster had been in and out half a
dozen times, having passed the afternoon in reading the Scriptures with
a distraught air at the houses of those of his flock who lived at Upper
and Lower Holme.

Jack's face was very sober when he came into the house and found us
waiting, Mary and Faith with us, for I had not thought it necessary to
hide from them the serious aspect of our affairs, and we had all gone
about all day, my mother declared, as if we had th' bailiffs in, which
to her mind was far worse than a death.

"It's Walker's split, sure enough," said Jack coming to the point at
once. "Him an' Bill Hall. George Mellor and Thorpe and Smith have been
taken and sent off to York under guard. That's for Horsfall's job they
say. John Walker, Ben's own brother, 's pinched for Rawfolds. So's
Jon'than Dean an' Tom Brook an' two or three others, but I couldn't
reightly find out who an' how many more. But there's no gainsayin' them.
An' more nor likely there's more to folly. When aw got to th' Brigg
there wer' a crowd round Buck Walker's house, booin' an' callin' out
'black sheep, black sheep.' But that'll do no gooid. There wer' some o'
those new constables at Mr. Radcliffe's brought up i' th' front o' th'
house, an' bar a stone or two thrown at th' windows no harm wer done. Aw
made mi way in, an' gate a word wi' Mrs. Walker, Ben's mother."

"But George--where was he taken? Cannot yo' tell us more of him?"

Jack glanced covertly at Faith. She sat with fingers tight interlaced
upon her knee. Her eyes were fixed on Soldier, wide dilated. Her lips
were parted, and she scarce breathed.

"Oh, tell us of George," she sighed rather than spoke.

"He wer' ta'en at th' shop. He wer' workin' with th' shears, an' like as
not thinkin' o' nowt so little as th' sodjers. They'd come up, about six
on 'em, very quiet, an' owd Radcliffe hissen wer' with 'em wi't officer
wi' th' warrant. Radcliffe come reight up to th' door as bold as brass
afore anyone i'side wer' aware on him, an' Ben Walker wer' wi' him. Ben
sidles into th' shop, an' George turns to speak to him but his eye fell
o' Mr. Radcliffe stood i' th' door way."

'Hows a wi' yo, George?' says Ben, an' holds out his hand.

"But George took it all in in a jiffy, an' he maks a spring at Ben, an'
they say he'd ha' run his shears into him if he'd got at him. But th'
chap wi' th' warrant rushes for'ard an' th' soldiers run in at a word
fra Mr. Radcliffe. 'Judas,' hissed George, and fixed his eyes on Ben an'
nivver took them off him while they put th' darbies on him an' Thorpe
'at wer' taken at th' same time. 'Judas, yo' cursed Judas!' and Walker
cowered behind th' stout owd magistrate like th' cur at he is. But,
quick, look to Faith."

Mary and my mother sprang to Faith's side, and Mary caught her in her
arms as she was falling unconscious to the ground. The poor lass had
swooned away. Jack supported her to the parlour, and laid her on the
horsehair sofa and my mother and Mary busied themselves in bringing her
round.

"Drat me for a tactless fool," said Jack, when he returned to the
kitchen. "Aw cannot ha' th' wit aw wer' born wi' to be ramblin' on like
that an' her there. Well, well, it's a pity her heart's so set yonder,
for awm feart her thowt's 'll be where her eyes 'll nivver rest again."
And for a long time Jack could not be moved to continue his story. It
was only when Mary returned to say that Faith was quite recovered, and
that the mother would stay with her in the parlour that he went on:

"George wer' game to th' last, an' Thorpe, they say, wer' just as
unconcerned as if he wer' used to bein' charged wi' murder every day o'
his life. When they thrust 'em into th' coach they had i' waitin',
George raised his hand as well as he could for th' irons, an' called
out, 'Three cheers for General Lud.' But th' crowd wer' fleyed to death.
A lad or two in th' throng cried out i' answer, an' a woman waved her
shawl, but everyone feart to be seen takin' his part, an' folk 'at had
known him fra a lad held back fra him same as if he'd getten th'
small-pox."

"Oh! the cowards, the heartless, ungrateful wretches!" cried Mary with
flashing eyes. "I wish I'd been there. I'd have, stood by him if his own
mother had disowned him!" And I have no doubt Mary would have been as
good as her words.

"Well and then?" said my father to prod on Soldier, who seemed to have
only half his heart in the story, for he kept his eyes fixed on the door
of the parlour, and seemed to be listening with all his ears for what
might be passing within.

"Well, they hustled him off wi' a clatter, th' soldiers mounted their
horses, three o' each side o' th' coach, an' off i' a gallop to Leeds on
their way to York. Ther' wer' more dragoons waiting for them by th'
Brigg for they feared a rescue, but, Lord bless yo', when they'd getten
George they'd gotten all th' heart an' all th' pluck to be fun' wi' in a
mile o' th' Brigg. A rescue say yo'? A swarm o' rats not worth feightin'
for. That's my judgment on 'em all."

"But you saw Mrs. Walker yo' said?" queried my father. "Had yo' no
speech wi' Ben?"

"Nay, they took good care o' that. Owd Radcliffe has him safe enough,
an' he'll noan let him slip aat o' his clutches till he's kept his
bargain an' put th' noose round George's neck. He's to be ta'en, they
say, to Chester, an' kept theer till th' York 'sizes. They'll noan gi'
th' Luds a chance o' stoppin' his mouth wi' an ounce o' lead, worse
luck. For awm noan so sure aw wouldn't ha' a try at him misen."

"And what had his mother to say?"

"Oh! lots. A cunning, contrary bitch, that aw sud say so! There's no
wonder Ben Walker wer' what he wer' wi' a dam like yon, whinin' an'
quotin' th' Scriptures, enough to mak a man turn atheist."

"But what did she say?"

"Oh! I cannot burden mi mind wi' all 'oo said, about it bein' th' Lord's
will, an' submission to th' ways of th' A'mighty, reg'lar blasphemy aw
call it, callin' in religion to cover up a piece o' as damned rascality
as ever wer' done by man. But there's something aw munnot forget. It
concerns thee, Mary."

"Me! what can she have to say to me." "That's what aw wanted to get at.
But 'oo'd noan send any word bi me. She particler wanted to know if
ther' wer' owt 'atween yo' an' Ben here."

Mary flushed and tossed her head.

"The impudence o' some folk," she said.

"Aw axed her what business that wer' o hers' an' towd her aw thowt 'oo'd
best turn her thowts to prayin' for that scamp o' a son o' hers. But 'oo
stuck to her guns. 'Oo wants to see thee, Mary."

"'Oo may want," said Mary.

"Well it's for yo' to judge. She made out it mut be waur for Ben here if
tha didn't go."

"Mary 'll noan go near such like wi' my consent," I cried.

"Whativver can th' woman want?" mused Mary. "Aw've a good mind.... Ben
Walker's away to Chester yo' say? For good an' all?"

"Aye, they'll keep him fast enough yo' may rest content."

"I've a good mind...," continued Mary. "Waur for our Ben, did she say?
I'll go."

"Yo'll do nowt o' th' sort!" I said.

"An' since when wer' yo' mi mester, cousin Ben?" she asked. "I'st go and
aunt 'll mebbe go wi' me."

"Not an inch," snapped my mother, who had left Faith in a great measure
composed "Aw'd be poisoned if aw' breathed th' same air."

"Then aw'st go by misen. Yo' can see me to th' Brigg, Ben, if tha likes.
But I'll hear what 'oo has to say. She cannot harm me, an I'st happen
get to know something that may help us."

"Mary's right," said Soldier. "My word, Ben, thee's getten thi mester,"
he whispered to me on the sly.

But it has been a sweet thraldom. When Mary had made up her mind she was
not one to let the grass grow under her feet, and the very next evening
she told me to get me dressed if I meant to go with her to th' Brigg. So
off we set together by Kitchen Fold, over Crossland Moor, past the
plantation where Mr. Horsfall had been shot, and so dropped down into
th' Brigg. I pointed out to Mary the marks of the bullets on the wall on
the road side opposite the little wood; but Mary shivered and drew her
shawl tighter about her and hurried on, casting frightened glances at
the clump of trees and bush as if she feared to see a ghost. She would
not let me go with her to Walker's, bidding me meet her in an hour's
time on the Brigg and be ready to company her back. So I thought I might
as well comfort myself with a glass at th' Nag's Head. It was not so
long since that the landlord would have fussed about me as I drank my
ale and offered me a treat. But now, as I sat aloof from the little
company and took my drink, he talked pointedly to the other customers
about the honest way he had always kept his house, saying he would have
neither Luds nor their brass at th' Nag's Head and their room was better
nor their company. But I would not be hurried for the likes of him, and
called for another gill and made it last out my hour just to spite him.

Mary did not keep me waiting long on th' Brigg, and fain I was to be
off, for little knots of people were clustered in the street and many a
look was cast at me, not over friendly; and faces that I knew well
enough looked stonily at me, and one or two that knew me well enough,
and to whom I gave the day, made as tho' they did not know me from Adam.
It was plain as a pike-staff that the folk at th' Brigg were fleyed out
of their wits of being suspected of having ought to do with the Luds.
They altered their tune later on, when th' first panic had passed, but
for a week or two after George and Thorpe were taken every man was on
his best behaviour, and a good many lived in hourly fear and trembling.

Be sure, then, we did not loiter in Longroyd Bridge. There was nothing
there to tempt us to stay, and Mary was in a greater hurry to be gone
than even I. She was very pale. She had had no spirits to talk of since
we had heard George was taken, but now she was more down nor ever. Not a
word spoke she right up th' moor till we got to th' top and turned round
to look on th' town lying at our feet. She was panting for breath, and I
drew her to the roadside and made her sit upon the wall. There was
nobody about, and the early night of late autumn had closed in. I tried
to steal my arm about her waist, tho' Mary was ever coy of suffering any
such show of my love. But she put away my arm very gently--"Yo mustn't
do that again, Ben. It's all ovver now. We'n had our dream, an' it's
been a sweet 'un. But I've had a rude wakening, an' it's all ovver, it's
all ovver." And Mary hid her face in her hands and bent over as she sat,
and tears trickled from under her hands down upon her lap.

I let her be, and she wept silently. Then she sprang to her feet and
dried her eyes and tried to smile and would have had me take the road
again; but I would not budge, and she had to sit by my side. The road
was quiet enough, and what mattered it if all the world saw us? We'd as
much right there as anyone.

"Now, Mary, tell me, like a sensible lass, what it all means."

Mary did not speak to me. I saw she was considering so I did not hurry
her. I was getting used to the ways of women. There's nought like loving
and courting for teaching a man th' way to handle 'em, tho' they're
kittle cattle to shoe at the' best o' times.

"There's summat aw hannot told thee, Ben. Happen aw should ha' done."

"Aw think aw can guess it."

"Tha nivver can."

"Is it about Ben Walker?"

Mary nodded.

"Martha towd me."

"Oh!"

There was a look passed over Mary's face which I took to mean that
Martha would have a piece of Mary's mind first chance that offered.

"Well?" I said.

"Well, of course, I'd ha' nowt to do wi' him."

"Aw should think not," I said, moving a little closer to her.

"And at first he thowt aw'd promised George."

"That comes fra not knowin' thi own mind." Mary drew further off.

"I told him so misen," I said.

Mary sprang up as if she'd been shot.

"Yo' did?"

"Aw did."

"Then yo've a deal to answer for, Ben Bamforth. His mother says that's
what made him peach on George."

"The devil!" I said, and there was silence, and we sat thinking our own
thoughts.

"It wer' happen my fault," said Mary at last, sitting down again.
"Anyway it's no use quarrelling about it."

"Nor crying over spilt milk," I said.

"But that's not th' worst on it by a long chalk," said Mary.

"Well, let's hear it?"

"She's a horrid woman, that Mrs. Walker. Just like an owd witch, an'
such wicked, wicked eyes, a peerin' at yo' an' a peerin' at yo', an'
wantin' to stroke yo'r hair like as if yo' wer' a cat. But aw'll begin
at th' beginnin'."

"That's th' best way," I said, and my arm now was where it should be,
and Mary reckoned not to know. I'd looked up th' road an' down th' road
an' nobody was coming.

"When aw got in, 'oo dusted a chair wi her apron, an' not afore it
wanted it. Th' house wer' like a pig-stye. But I sat down, an' 'oo stood
afore me an' looked me up an' down same as if 'oo wer' vallyin' me. 'Aw
hope yo'll know me again next time yo' see me, an' that won't be soon if
I've my way' aw thowt, but said nowt.

'An' so yo'r Mary o' Mally's?' 'oo said at last.

'At yo'r service,' aw said.

'Yo're not much to look at,' 'oo said.

'Thank yo' kindly,' aw answered as polite as never were.

'But yar Ben's a reight to ha' his own way now he's a gentleman.'

'A what?' aw cried.

'A gentleman. A real gentleman at can ha' th' pick o' th' country side.
He's nowt to do but howd up his finger naa. It'll be whistle an' aw'll
come to yo', mi lad.'

'He's altered strangely,' aw said.

'Aye, two thousand p'un' does mak' a differ,' says th' owd hag.

"And then aw remembered about th' notice in th' paper.

'It'll do him no good,' aw says. 'It's blood money. There'll be a curse
on it.'

'It's good gold, lass!' 'oo says. 'Good gold, leastways it will be when
th' 'sizes is ovver. An then yar Ben's off to 'Meriky, an' nowt 'll suit
him but yo' mun go wi' him.'

'Then he'll noan be suited,' aw says.

'Hoity-toity, mi fine wench,' 'oo cries. 'Don't thee be too sure o'
that. Yo'r happen thinkin' o' ta'in up wi' Ben Bamforth. Leastways
that's what yar Ben heerd just afore he wer' off to Chester. That's what
aw've sent for yo' for.'

'What's it to him, who aw wed?' I asked, but aw wer' all of a tremble.

'It's this. It'll be yar Ben or nobody sin he's set on it. 'See her
yoursen, mother,' he said, an' these were awmost his last words afore he
set off wi' Justice Radcliffe, two gentlemen together. 'See her yo'rsen,
an' tell her that th' same tongue 'at's teed a rope round George
Mellor's neck can tee' one round Ben Bamforth's, an' will too, unless
she speaks the word that'll stop my mouth.' Now, what's ta say, mi fine
lass?'

"And what could I say, Ben," sobbed Mary, hiding her face on my
shoulder. "Aw saw she meant it. She gay' me a month to think on it, an'
if aw don't say yes 'oo swears Ben Walker 'll give thee up to th' law,
an' it's a hangin' job, sure an' certain."

"What did yo' say, Mary?"

"At first I towd her aw wouldn't wed their Ben if there weren't another
man i' all England. Aw'd rayther wed a toad, aw said, an' aw meant it.
But oh, Ben, tha'rt i' their power, an' aw'm noan worth hangin' for. And
what would yo' have me do, Ben? Aw mun tell her in a month."

"There's one thing tha shalln't do," I cried. "Aw'd rayther hang a
million times ovver nor tha should ha' a thing like him. Let her do her
worst. Not if it would save me from ten thousand times ten thousand base
deaths shall Ben Walker call thee wife. That aw'm fixed on. What say'st
ta, Mary?"

"Eh, awm fair moithered, Ben. Aw know this, if wed him I must aw'll mak'
a hole i' th' cut th' same neet," and Mary sobbed again.

And I declare that I was happier whilst I soothed her and whispered
words of bye and pressed kisses on her cheek and lips than ever before.
For never till then had I realized to the full all the sweet privileges
of our love.



CHAPTER XII.

I HAD got my affairs into, a pretty tangle, and for the life of me I
could not see my way out of the mess. I lived in daily terror of arrest.
I was not even supported by what appeals so strongly to a young man's
vanity--popular good-will. When a man gets older he comes to esteem the
applause of the world at its proper worth, largely indifferent to it and
content if happily he can be assured of the good-will of his own
conscience. But even the poor solace of the public voice was just now
denied the poor Luds. The murder of Mr. Horsfall had revolted the
general mind. So I found myself quaking at every step that approached
the door when I kept the house, and met with looks averted or openly
hostile when I took my walks abroad, which was not oftener than needs
must be. Then there was that diabolic threat of Ben o' Buck's, which I
had no reason to hope he would not make good. I could not essay to save
my own skin by counselling Mary to have Ben Walker. Even had I not loved
her myself I could scarce have brought her to that. Add to this the
reflection that, innocently and honestly enough, I had probably been the
means of drawing upon George Mellor's head the spiteful hatred of the
traitor by giving him to believe that it was a made up thing between
Mary and George. I tell you I could neither eat nor sleep these days for
thinking of all these matters. And Mary looked worn and ill. The rose's
began to fade from her cheeks, she had scarce a word to throw at a dog,
and as the days grew to weeks her gloom deepened and misery showed more
plain upon her face.

I took counsel of 'Siah. I was in such straits that I could have found
it in my heart to seek wisdom from the town fool. 'Siah had a short cut
out of the whole perplexity.

"Yo' mun get untwisted, Ben," said 'Si.

"What's untwisted?" I asked.

"I cannot tell wher' yo'r wits are these days," said 'Siah impatiently.
"Theer tha sits by th' fireside, counting th' co'wks' an' glowerin' into
th' ass-hoil, as if that 'ud do thi ony good. Tha shud stir about, mon,
an' hear whats a foot. There's more i'spiration, as th' parson calls it,
to be fun' at th' Black Bull i' hauf an hour nor i' a week o' sulkin' at
whom bi thissen."

"Aw've no faith i' th' counsel 'at's to be found at th' bottom o' an'
ale-pot, 'Si."

"Who want's thee to ha? Th'art as bad as Martha for preachin' these
days. Ther'll be no livin' for sermons soon. There's summat beside
drinkin' goin' off in a public."

"Well, lets hear it?" I said passively, for I had not much faith in what
'Siah might have picked up in his haunts.

"Aw tell thee tha should get untwisted."

"Well?"

"Well and well an' well. Can ta say nowt but well? Doesn't ta know what
aw mean, or mun I tell thee straight out?"

"Aw've no' more notion nor th' babe unborn," I said.

"Yo' know Mr. Scott o' Woodsome?"

"Of course aw do. Didn't aw sit next to him at th' audit, last year?"

"Well yo' know he's a magistrate, an' main good to th' poor folk,
everyone says he is. He's everyone's good word, an' that's summat out o'
th' common for a justice."

"And how can Mr. Scott help us in our troubles? I fear they're a bit
aboon his power."

"Why, he can untwist thee, mon."

"Untwist?"

"Aye! untwist! There's Doad o' Jamie's an' Lijah o' Mo's an' a seet more
on 'em 's gate untwisted, an' it costs nowt, an's just as easy as
sinnin', an' a heap more comfortin' by what they say."

"And what in the name o' wonder is it?" I asked, thinking 'Siah might
have penetrated deeper into the mysteries of the law than I, and having
much respect for him, as one who had more than once slipped through the
constable's hands and left him clinkin'.

"Yo' know th' oath we took at th' Buck," replied 'Siah, lowering his
voice and looking cautiously round.

I nodded.

"Well, Mr. Scott's untwisting th' oath off th' Luds for miles around.
Yo'n nowt to do but go to Woodsome an' say yo'r soary an' let on to tell
all yo' know, an' that needn't be more nor yo' can see wi' both e'en
shut, an' he untwists yo'. It's same as th' Catholics, tha knows."

"Why that's king's evidence," I cried.

"Yo' may call it what yo' like, but it's cheap an' easy, an' 'll do
nobody any harm."

"What give evidence again mi own cousin? I'd be as bad as Ben Walker."

"Nowt o' th' sort. They'n getten witnesses enew baht thee, an' Mr. Scott
's a friend o' thi father's, an' 'll let thee dahn soft for auld
acquaintance sake. It isn't as if tha wer' th' first to split, nor as if
owt tha can other say or do 'ud pull George out o' th' boil or thrust
him further in."

"I'll ha none of it, 'Si," I cried. "And what's more yo' an' me quarrel
if yo' do owt o' th' sort thissen. Why man, aw sud nivver sleep another
wink nor howd up mi head agen if aw lowered misen to that, an' whativver
tha does, 'Si, keep thissen cleaner nor Ben Walker. Aw'd never speak to
thee agen, no more would any on us'. Has ta' spoke to Martha on it?"

"Well awm not free to say but what aw han."

"And what does Martha say?"

"Well if aw mun speak th' truth she says th' same as thee. All fools in
a lump, say I, but gang thi own gate, an' dunnot fear aw'st cross thi
will. But its hard liggin' for all that."

So I got no comfort from 'Siah.

Then, as if we hadn't troubles enough of our own, my Aunt Wood, George's
mother, came from the Brigg to see my father about George's case. It
must not be thought we had not worried about him. We had, and more than
a little. Whenever I pictured to myself my cousin and more than friend,
eating his heart out in a prison cell, I was near beside myself with
grief. As for the end of it all, I dared not think of it. I had parted
from George in anger; but I made no account of that. I was safe in
Mary's love, and those who win can afford to be generous. And if these
Luddite troubles had blown over, George might have come round, and tho'
our relations might never have been what they had been, still we could
have patched up a work-a-day friendship that would have served. But now
George was in prison, charged with the most awful of all crimes, and
tho' my gorge rose at the deed, I sorrowed for the man.

It was sad to see the change in my Aunt Wood. She was never a strong
woman, least-wise in my knowledge of her; but now she was piteous to
look at. She was crushed by the burthen of sorrow and shame. Sorrow's
bad enough: but add shame to it, and it's more than human soul can bear.
My mother fair wept over her.

"Eh, lass," she said, when she had taken my aunt's shawl and poke bonnet
and got her seated by the fire, whilst Mary busied about boiling the
kettle and making some tea. "Eh! lass, that ever we should live to see
this day."

My aunt drooped her head. She did not greet nor moan. I think the
fountain of her tears was dry.

"My heart's sore for yo', Matty, and glad I am yo've come to me i' yo'r
trouble."

"I had to come, Charlotte, for if yo'r William cannot help me, I dunnot
know wheer to turn."

"Aw'll do owt aw can. Yo' know that, Matty. Aw set a deal o' store on
George. We all did. Aw cannot think what possessed him. More aw think on
it, more awm capped, for George wer' noan o' th' sort to . . . . It's
fair beyond me. What does Wood say?"

"It's that's brought me here, William. It's a cruel thing to say; but in
his heart o' hearts aw think mi husband's fair glad they'n fetched our
George. He never took to th' lad, nor George to him. But yo'd ha' thowt
at naa, when aw want all th' comfort aw can get, mi own husband 'ud be
th' first to help."

And Aunt Wood's lips trembled and she pressed her thin hand to her
throat to keep down the sobs that choked her.

"Dunnot tak' on, Matty," said my father. "We'st stand to yo', wet or
fine."

"Aw shud think so i'deed," cried my mother; "my own sister. If yo' can't
look to yo'r own in th' time o' need, what's relations for aw shud like
to know. Onybody 'll stan' yo'r friend when yo'r i' no need o' frien's.
It's trouble tries folk. Nah, thee drink this cup o' tea, Matty, an'
nivver heed drawin' to th' table. Sit wher' tha art an' keep thi feet on
th' fender. An', see yo', there's a drop o' rum i' thi tea, tho' aw
dunnot hold wi' it as a reg'lar thing, for wilful waste ma'es woful
want, but it'll warm thee an' hearten thi up. Tha' looks as if tha
hadn't a drop o' blood i' thi body, poor thing."

"Hast ta any notion o' what tha'd like doin' for George?" asked my
father.

"Nay, it'll be a law job, that's all aw know. But see, awm noan come a
beggin'. Aw dunnot know what William 'ud say, if he knew; but yo'll noan
tell."

And my aunt lifted her dress and from under the skirt drew a linen bag,
which she placed upon the table.

"Count that." she said.

My father turned over the greasy, dirty notes, pound notes of the
Huddersfield Commercial Bank, Ingham's, wetting his forefinger and
counting aloud, very grave, as he always was whenever he counted money.
He used to say it gave him a turn, when he went to the Bank, to see the
flippant way the young men handled the money across the counter--"But
they don't know its valley, or they'd noan finger it so free," he would
say.

"A hundred pounds, neither more nor less," he said, after the third
counting and blowing of each note to see two hadn't stuck together.
"Wherever did ta get it, Matty?"

"Aw saved it out o' th' housekeepin' brass 'at Wood gives me. Aw'd meant
it for George' on th' day he should be wed--but nah!"

"It'll come in useful ony road," said my father. "Am aw to keep it for
thee?"

"Aye, it's for th' law."

"Has ta any fancy?"

"Nay, tha knows best."

"What does ta say to 'Torney Blackburn? He's allus done my bit."

"Aw dunnot know. Aw reckon there's not much to choose among 'em he mun
be th' best brass can buy."

"Well there's young Allison; aw don't know but what he'd be more cut out
for a job like this. But they say he's for th' Crown. Him an' Justice
Radcliffe ha' been here, there an' everywheer huntin' up evidence agen
th' 'sizes."

"Aye, trust th' quality for havin' th' best o' everything," spoke my
mother.

"Well, if tha thinks 'Torney Blackburn can be trusted, tha can set him
on. But awm feart them lawyers is all in a string. Yo' never know who
yo' can trust these days."

"Well yo' see," said my father, "we'n got to trust 'em an' pray for th'
best. Aw supposes there's summot i' th' nature o' th' law 'at makes it
difficult for th' best on 'em to be ony better nor he sud be; an' happen
if they warn't a bit crooked theirsen, they'd noan be fit to straighten
other folk's twists. But 'speak of a man as yo' find him,' say I, an'
aw've allus fun 'Torney Blackburn as straight as they make 'em. But aw
wish we could ha' had Mr. Allison all th' same."

"Why?" asked my aunt.

"Well, somehow he'st th' name o' bein' thicker wi' Owd Harry; an' that
goes a long way i' law."

And so it was settled that the defence of George should be entrusted to
Mr. Blackburn, of the New Street.

I went with my father the very next day to see Mr. Blackburn. I did not
like being seen about, but there seemed nothing for it but to brazen it
out and take my luck. I had never been to a lawyer's office before, and
felt as if I were going to have a tooth pulled; but my father opened the
door of the outer office as bold as brass. There was a little old
wizened man with a face like yellow crinkled sheepskin, and a suit that
had once been black, maybe, but now was rusty brown and white at the
seams.

"Is he in?" said my father.

"Sit down, Mr. Bamforth, sit down. Come to the fire. Your son, sir?
Pleased to know you, sir. A chip of the old block, Mr. Bamforth, a chip
of the old block."

And my father actually looked pleased, tho' if I were a chip of the old
block there was a deal more chip than block.

Mr. Blackburn was in, and presently we were ushered into an inner room.
It would have turned my mother sick to see the dust that lay about, and
the frosted windows that gave on to the New Street looked as if they
hadn't been washed for a century.

Mr. Blackburn shook us both by the hand in a jerky way, and offered my
father a pinch of snuff from a big silver box. My father took a pinch
with the result that he never ceased sneezing till we were out into the
street and he had hurried to the Boot and Shoe and drunk a pint of ale
to wash the tickling out of his throat.

"And now, Mr. Bamforth, what can I do for you?" asked Mr. Blackburn,
pushing his spectacles on to his brow and laying a large brown silk
handkerchief, snuff coloured, over his knee.

"It's about George Mellor, yo know," said my father.

Mr. Blackburn did not look as if he did know.

"Him 'at's ta'en for Horsfall's job, yo' know," explained my father.

"Well, what of him?"

"He's my nevvy, yo' know."

"Yo'r nevvy? Phew! this is an ugly business, an ugly business."

"Awm feart so."

"Well?"

"Aw want yo' to defend him at th' 'sizes."

"Why my good man, what defence is possible? Allison tells me the case is
as clear as crystal. Not a loop hole in it."

My father's face fell. Then he pulled out the bag of notes.

"There's a hundred pound here, Mr. Blackburn. George shalln't stand up
i' Court wi'out one soul to take his side. Guilty or not guilty,
whatever th' law can do for him shall be done. It'll happen soothe him
at the last, if th' worst comes to th' worst, to know at some hearts
felt for him, an' that what brass could do to get him off, wer' done."

"It's a noble sentiment, Mr. Bamforth, and does you credit I'm sure.
Well, well, no man's guilty in this country, thank God, till he's proved
guilty. But I can't make bricks without straw, you know. What's the
defence?"

"Nay, that's for you to find out," said my father, more cheerfully.
"That's' what th' hundred pound is for."

"But we don't make evidence, my dear sir. There can be only one
defence--an alibi. The man was shot, that's plain. It wasn't an
accident, that's clear. Who ever did it, did it of malice prepense.
There can only be an alibi. This young man now"--turning to me--"the
prisoner was your cousin?"

"Yes, sir."

"And doubtless you were on good terms?"

"The best."

"And equally without doubt you saw a deal of each other?"

"We did."

"He visited you and you him?"

"That's so."

"And you remember the night of the--what day was it?"

"Tuesday the 28th of April last."

"And you remember that day?"

"Only too well."

"Now perhaps--I only say, perhaps, mark you--your cousin George spent
the evening of that day in your company? A respectable young man like
you--your word would go a long way."

But I shook my head. No, I could not swear I was with George that
fateful day.

"Well, well, perhaps someone else can. I must see the prisoner, and when
I've heard what he has to say, I shall be better able to judge what is
best to be done. Another pinch, Mr. Bamforth? No? a bad habit, a bad
habit, don't you begin it, young sir, but clears the brain. Good
day--Jones, give Mr. Bamforth a receipt for 100. "Rex versus Mellor."
Good day--we'll do our best, and a case is never lost till it's won."

"Did' yo' notice th' books, Ben?" asked my father, as we crossed the
street to the Boot and Shoe. "Wonderful isn't it? Aw dunnot wonder a man
wants some snuff or summat to life th' weight o' all them books off his
brain. Aw wonder how he crams it all in, for his yed's noan so much
bigger nor other folk. Wonderful."

When we got home that night we had to tell in detail all that we had
said to Mr. Blackburn and all that Mr. Blackburn had said to us. Soldier
Jack and Mr. Webster were of our council.

"It's a tickle business is an alibi," Jack commented. "Them lawyers turn
a chap inside out. Aw once tried to get a felly out o' a bit o' a mess
afore th' justices at Bristol. He wer' one o' th' line an' had used his
belt in a street broil. I went to swear him off."

"I hope, Soldier, not to perjure yourself," said Mr. Webster earnestly.

"Well not to say perjure," said Jack. "They say if yo' kiss yo'r thumb
i'sted of th' Book, it's noan perjury. But aw did better nor that, aw'd
a ready reckoner i' th' palm o' my hand, an' aw kissed that. So aw
reckon aw wer' clear ony road."

Mr. Webster sighed and shook his head.

"But it wer' o' no use. Ther' wer' a little chap at wer' persecutin',
an' he looked that innercent yo'd ha' thowt ony sort o' a tale 'ud go
dahn wi' him. But aw nivver wer' so mista'en i' a chap i' my life. He
began to cross-question me mild as milk. He wanted to know what aw'd had
for mi breakfast an' wheer aw took my ale an' a hundred thousand things,
an' raked out th' whole history o' mi life awmost fra mi pap bottle
up'ards, an' he twisted mi answers so, an' th' magistrates began to look
at me as if aw wer th' worst specimen o' a criminal they'd ivver seen;
an' he back'ards an' for'ards, lopin' like a flea fra this spot to that
spot o' mi tale, till aw didn't know whether aw wer' stood o' mi head or
mi heels. An' he looked at mi wi' an eye like a gimlet, an' for th' life
o' me aw couldn't tak' mi e'en fra his, tho' aw'd ha' given owt to do
it. An' then aw saw aw'd contradicted misen, not exactly a lie, but a
bit o' a slip, an' aw saw he'd twigged it, an' aw saw he saw aw saw he'd
twigged it; an' ther' come a quiet smile o' his lips, an' he looked at
me as much as to say 'what a clever fool yo' are,' an' he played wi' me
like a cat lakin' wi' a mouse, an' aw broke out into a sweat an' aw'd
ha' swapped places wi' th' prisoner an' given summat to boot. Phew! it
mak's me warm yet to think on it! It's risky wark is a haliby, aw tell
yo', an chance it."

"I suppose the Crown will rely mainly on the evidence of Ben Walker?"
asked Mr. Webster.

My father nodded assent.

"But I think I have read that a man cannot be hanged on the unsupported
testimony of an informer. If they have only Walker's evidence to go on,
or indeed that of any other participator in the deed, the case may break
down."

"It's no go," said Jack. "There's others beside Ben o' Buck's ha'
leaked. As soon as it wer' known he'd split there wer' a reg'lar
scramble to turn informer. Everyone wer' anxious to be i' th' swim.
There's Joe Sowden."

"O' th' Yews?" I asked.

Jack nodded. "Th' same felly."

"Why what could he say?"

"Th' story is that th' day after th' job wer' done, George went into th'
croppin' shop, an' him an' Thorpe towd Sowden all about it."

"What, that they had shot Mr. Horsfall?" exclaimed my father, in a voice
of horror.

"Nowt else. An' they made Sowden tak' a oath to keep th' secret an'
sweer all th' others to keep th' secret. Everyone i' th' shop wer'
sworn. There weren't a soul i' all John Wood's that weren't sworn. And
folk say George held a pistol at Sowden's head while he read th' oath
off a bit o' papper an' made 'em all kiss th' book."

We stared at each other blankly.

"But is this known to the Crown?" asked Mr. Webster at length.

"Sowden's takin' his tea at this minnit i' Chester Castle, livin' o' th'
fat o' th' land, a guest o' th' king, feastin' like a fightin' cock, an'
yo'll nivver set eyes on him agen till yo see him i' th' witness-box at
York 'sizes," said Jack. "An' there's more to tell. They say George
borrowed a Russian pistol fra William Hall."

"Well, I'll vouch for Hall, ony road, for all awm worth," I burst out.
"He'll noan turn traitor. He wer' allus th' keenest o' th' lot on us."

"Tha'd lose thi brass," said Jack quietly. "Hall's sat just nah opposite
Sowden, like as not drinkin' success to honesty. He lent his pistol to
George the very day Horsfall wer' shot, an' seed him load it with ball
an' slugs."

"Why Hall lodged at Wood's an' slept wi' George, i' th' same room if not
i' th' same bed," I murmured.

"Skin for shin, yea all that a man hath will he give for his fife,' so
says the Book." Thus Mr. Webster.

"And after Horsfall wer' shot, choose who shot him," Jack went on.
"George Mellor an' Thorpe went to Joe Mellor's at Dungeon Wood an' hid
two pistols, an' one on 'em, they do say, is th' self-same pistol 'at
Hall lent to George afore th' job wer' done."

I do not know whether any of us till then, clung to a hope that George
might be cleared of any share in the murder. For my own part I had known
from the first minute I set eyes on George when he came to me at Holme
the day after the deed, known without a word spoken, that he was guilty.
All the same the law's the law, and it was none of my business to tell
what I thought. Thinking's not evidence, and if there was a loop-hole
for him anywhere I'd widen it for him rather than stop it.

"All the evidence points one way," said Mr. Webster despondently.

"Oh, no! it doesn't, beggin' yo'r pardon for contradictin' yo'," said
Jack. "There's plenty think George 'll scrape through."

"As how?" I asked.

"Why on th' halibey. Mr. Blackburn 'll have summat to go on. Yo' know
John Womersley, th' watch maker' i' Cloth Hall Street?"

"Aye, aye."

"Well he says he wer' talkin' wi' George just after six bi th' clock
opposite th' Cloth Hall, an' had a glass wi' him at th' White Hart."

"Well?"

"Why it wer' just on six when Mr. Horsfall wer' shot on Crosland Moor,
an' if George were i' th' White Hart at hauf past six, it stan's to
reason he couldn't be shootin' folk on th' moor at six."

"Womersley's a decent man, and his word will have weight," said my
father with relief in his tone. "Perhaps we've been misjudgin' the lad
after all."

"Let's hope so," said Soldier. "An' like enough others 'll turn up 'at
can give similar evidence. But it's a tickle job is a halibey, best o'
times."

And so our council ended, Jack engaging to search high and low for any
scrap of testimony that might help the prisoners.

The month within which Mary must give her answer to Walker's mother
stole on. I scarce could trust myself to look on Mary so sad and wan was
she. But one morning towards the middle of December after she had sided
the breakfast things she donned her Sunday clothes, a thing rarely done
on week-days in our house, except for visits of more than common
ceremony, or for weddings and parties.

"I'm going to Huddersfe'lt and mebbe a step beyond," she told my mother.

"To see thi Aunt Matty?"

"I'st happen see her."

My heart quaked.

"Yo'r never goin' to Walker's?" I asked when I could speak to her alone.

"Trust me for that," she said. "I'd rather walk a good few miles another
way."

"Then where'st ta goin'?" I persisted, "an' winnot yo' tak' Faith? Th'
walk 'll happen do her good if she wraps well up."

"Faith mun see to th' mixin' o' th' Kersmas cake. Awn towd her how to
mix th' dough, an' aw'll hope 'oo'll mak' a better job on it nor 'oo did
o' th' parkin o' Bunfire Day; but it's never too late to larn, an' awm
thinkin' it won't be long afore she'll need to know summat more nor to
play on th' spinnet an' to sing hymns an' love ditties. They'll boil no
man's kettle."

But of her errand to Huddersfield I could get no inkling, and off she
set in the forenoon through the snow with warm hood over her head and
thick Paisley shawl and mittens, and pattens to her feet, as sweet a
picture as ever went down that hill before or since.

It was night, eight o'clock, when she came home, and many a time I'd
gone into the lane and strained my eyes across the valley to watch the
road from Kitchen Fold. The snow was falling thick, and when Mary
entered her shawl was covered with the flakes and little feathery sprays
were on the curls that twined and twisted from beneath the hood. Her
cheeks that had grown so pale were a rosy flush with the keen frosty
air, her eyes were bright and glad and there was the first smile upon
her lips had played there for many a doleful day. She shook her shawl at
the house door, whilst Vixen yapped and gambolled about her and Faith
made haste to remove her pattens and knock the clogged snow from the
irons while Mary smoothed her hair before the little glass by the
window.

"An' how's thi Aunt Matty?" asked my mother; "an dun yo' want owt to
eit? Yo'll be ready for yo'r porridge aw sud judge. Is 'oo bearin' up
pretty well, an' did ta see John Wood, an' is he lookin' as ill favored
as ivver?"

"Let th' lass get her breath," pleaded my father.

"Has ta met a fairy?" went on my mother. "For a month an' more tha's
been mopin' an' turnin' thi nose up at good victuals an' comin' dalin
o' a mornin' lookin' as if thi bed wer' made o' nettles i'stead o'
honest feathers, as well aw know 'at plucked 'em, an' nivver a word nor
a look for anyb'dy, an' wouldn't see th' doctor nor tak' th' herb-tea aw
brewed thee, an' me thinkin' all th' time it wer' a tiff atween thee an'
Ben, an' him lookin' waur nor a whipped cur, which it's to be hoped
yo'll both learn more sense when yo'r well wed, for it'll be as th' man
said 'Bear an' forbear' then or yo'll ha' a sorry time on it; an' now
yo' set off wi'out a wi' yo'r leave or by yo'r leave an' come back fra
goodness knows where lookin' as if yo'd been proved next o' kin to a
fortin', which it's enough to make anyone think it wor all make believe,
tho' me that anxious as aw sud be fit to shake yo' if so aw thowt."

My mother paused to get breath.

"I've summat to make me look cheerful," said Mary. "Yo' little know
wheer I'n been this afternoon, an' who I've talked to and had a cup o'
tea into th' bargain. Aw don't feel it's real yet. Nip me, Faith, to let
me know if I'm dreamin!"

"It's a dream we should like to share in," said Faith in her quiet way,
taking my mother's hard, thin hand, much worn by work, and soothing it
caressingly, a way she had that always ended by bringing a reposeful
look upon that eager nervous face and made my mother declare Faith was
as good as hops in your pillow for restfulness.

"Well aw suppose I'st ha' to begin at th' beginnin'," said Mary,
settling herself for a long talk and smiling into the fire. My father
filled another pipe, and my mother let her ball of wool roll upon the
floor so as to have a long reach of work before her.

"Yo' maybe hannot guessed at Ben Walker wanted me to wed him."

"What Ben o' Buck's o' th' Brigg? Him as turned informer?" asked my
father, letting his pipe out in his amaze.

Mary nodded.

"That comes o' thi flighty ways," commented my mother with severity. "If
a lass dunnot keep hersen to hersen, but will ha' a nod for this an' a
smile for that an' a joke for t' other, she may know what to expec'.
There wor a differ between decent gells an' hussies when aw wer' young,
but if there's ony now it's all i' favour o' th' hussies."

Mary flushed angrily.

"Nay, nay, Charlotte, yo' dunnot mean that for yar Mary, aw know," said
my father. "Go on wi' thi tale, lass. Thi aunt's put out a bit, these
days."

"Well he did," continued Mary, "and of course aw'd his answer ready for
him."

"Aw shud think so indeed. It was well for him aw didn't catch 'im at it.
What did ta say, Mary?"

"Nay, aunt, yo' wouldn't ha' me cumber mi mind wi' such trash. Any road
aw sent 'im packin'. Then, about a three week sin', his owd mother sent
for me."

"Did 'oo send a broom for thee to ride on, th' owd witch," put in the
tireless tongue, more by way of expressing an opinion of Ben Walker's
mother than a question.

"And aw went," said Mary.

"More fool yo'."

"And 'oo said 'oo'd heard aw'd ta'en up wi' Ben here an' axed me if it
wer' true."

"An' of course tha'd thi answer to that too," said my mother
triumphantly.

"Well, yes," admitted Mary.

"So that put a spoke i' that wheel," said my father, knocking his pipe
head on the fire-grate bar.

"Not a bit on it," quoth Mary. "On th' contrary she seemed rayther glad
to hear it. But 'oo said he'd noan ha' to ha' me."

"Who, ya'r Ben?"

"Aye, yo'r Ben."

"Who's to stop him?"

"Mrs. Walker o' th' Brigg, by yo'r good leave, aunt. She said 'oo'd gie
me a month to think on it, an' if aw didn't gi'e mi word to ha' their
Ben, she'd just speak a word to th' Government ovver that Rawfolds job
as 'ud send Ben here to keep George Mellor company."

The knitting fell from my mother's hand, the pipe from my father's They
stared at Mary and at me.

"So that's what's ailed yo' this three week back. Herb-tea might well be
wasted on yo'," at length my mother managed to gasp.

"That wer' just th' complaint we were suffering fra, wern't it, Ben?"

"An' beyond any physic aw ever heard on," I said. "But tha seems to ha'
fun a cure."

"But you won't have him," said Faith eagerly. "Oh! the wretched plotter.
Say you refused, Mary?"

"A varmint not fit to be touched wi' a pair o' tongs," remarked my
mother.

"But to save Ben here?" asked Mary, maliciously.

And my parents looked at each other. It was a dilemma's horns.

"Don't look worried, ma'am," said Faith. "Mary's only plaguing us. She
has found a way out, it's plain to see. She wouldn't look as she does if
she hadn't."

"Then till beseems her to be fleyin' her elders out o' their wits an' mi
heart goin' pit-a-pat that fast at aw may be took any minnit," said my
mother.

"Awm sorry, aunt," said Mary, quickly crossing the hearth and putting
her arms round my mother's neck and kissing her brow. "Aw shouldn't ha'
done it if aw'd thowt; but awm so happy awm hardly misen. Theer, aw'll
tell mi tale."

"Well, then, yo' may be sure after aw heerd owd Mother Walker's threat
aw wer' bothered aboon a bit. Aw wer' noan for weddin' her lad, even if
he hadn't turned informer, but what use 'ud Ben here be to me hangin' i'
irons off York gibbet. Aw could na see a road aat, look choose which way
aw would. Well yesterday aw heerd uncle here say my lord an' lady
Dartmouth wer' at Woodsome."

My father gave a corroboratory nod.

"So aw thowt it ovver all neet, an' to make a long story short awn been
to Woodsome this very day."

"An' seen my lord?" cried my father.

"Aye, an' mi lady, too. When aw gate to th' big door lookin' on to th'
lawn--an' yo' should ha' seen th' deer down th' big avenue made o'
trees like th' pillars o' a cathedral aisle--when aw gate to th' door
aw gav' a knock at th' big knocker, an' it made such a clatter aw could
ha' fun it i' my heart to run, but aw thowt aw'd come so far aw'd see it
through. A felly oppened th' door. A reg'lar nobob. 'It's mi lord
hissen,' aw thowt. He'd a powdered wig, an' epaulettes, an' a brown
plush coat wi' big buttons wi' figurin' on, an' a scarlet weskit, an'
plush shorts an' silk stockin's an' oh! such an air o' haughty pride. He
pulled hissen up when he seed me. 'Yo' sud ha' gone to th' tradesmen's
entrance,' he says. 'Aw want to see his lordship,' aw says as loud as aw
could, but aw could scarce hear my own voice, an' aw dropped a courtesy,
'an' a reckon yo' mun be him, tho' aw didn't reckon to see so big a man,
for Mr. Scott told me ye' wer' nowt much to look at.' And then aw heerd
a loud laugh, an' i' th' gloom o' th' big hall aw spied a littlish man
very plain dressed. 'Admit: the lady,' he said. And aw wer' shown into a
room on th' reight hand, an' th' little man came in an' made me sit
dahn, but not afore he'd helped me off wi' mi shawl, which wer' wet wi'
snow, an' made that stuck up jackanapes tak' it to be dried. 'An ask her
leddyship to spare me a minnit,' sez he. Then there came in a young
leddy, just such another as thee, Faith, an' so pleasant i' th' face. An
'oo smiled at me, an' wouldn't hear a word till aw'd warmed misen by th'
fire, an' 'oo made me drink a glass o' wine."

"Did yo' tell her who's lass tha wer'?" asked my father. "But he'd noan
know me. Th' owd lord 'ud ha' known me. But this 'un's nobbud been th'
earl a year or two, an awn nobbud seen him once or twice."

"Well, anyway he didn't say he didn't," said Mary diplomatically. "And
then," continued Mary, "aw up an' tell'd them all about it, about Ben o'
Buck's pesterin' me an' about Long Tom an' about Ben's arm an' about
thee, aunt, bein' confined to thi bed an' havin' th' doctor to thee an'
all time ailin' nowt...."

"Aye, an' what did they say to that?"

"Well, th' little lord laughed like a good 'un, an' said th' doctor 'ud
ha' to be sent to th' 'sizes for bein' a summat after the fact, not a
necessary, what wor it?--oh! an accessory. But aw seed he wer' jokin!
Then aw began to tell about Ben Walker's mother, an' her ladyship told
th' little Earl he'd better go out o' th' room, an' when he'd gone aw
just down o' mi knees i' front on her, an' 'oo drew mi face to her an'
aw had a good cry, an' 'oo drew mi face everything just as yo know it."

"Well, an' then?"

"Why she looked very grave and said it wer' a serious business an' a
very delicate matter for his lordship to meddle in. She told me summat
aw didn't quite mak' out about their party not bein' in just now."

"Of course not," said my father. "Aw could ha' told yo' that."

"But any way,' says she, 'my uncle's in the ministry and good friends
with th' Secretary of State. So cheer up, Mary; th' men may manage th'
State; but we know who manages th' men, an' my name's not Fanny Legge if
yo'r lover shan't go free.'"

"Did she say Fanny?" said my mother.

"She did," replied Mary, "just plain Fan an' never a countess to it, and
what's more she gave me this locket wi' her picture in it, an' told me
to wear it o' mi weddin' day, an' wear it aw shall an' will, an' mebbe
those 'at come after me." And Mary drew from her bosom the portrait you,
my children, know so well of that young countess who so untimely died.

"Aw think that settles it," said my father, smiting his thigh.

"Of course it does," said my mother. "An' aw hope, William Bamforth, 'at
after this yo'll vote blue an' side wi' th' quality. T'other lot's good
enuff for shoutin', but gi' me th' owd fam'lies when it comes to th'
stick an' lift."

And this profound political aphorism may close a chapter too long drawn
out.



CHAPTER XIII.

I NEVER in my life passed so gloomy a Christmas as that of 1812. We
killed a goose as usual, and there was the usual seasoned pudding and
plum pudding, and Faith and Mary made a bit of a show with the holly and
the mistletoe. But it was no use. We couldn't brighten up our hearts nor
take our thoughts from the Special Commission which was to sit at York
in the fore-end of January to try the Luds. Even our neighbours felt we
could be in no mood for rejoicing, and neither the Church singers nor
the Powle Moor lot came near us, and as for wishing each other a merry
Christmas the farce would have been too ghastly.

It was arranged that my father, Mr. Webster and I should go to York for
the trial, and at the last moment Faith pleaded for leave to accompany
us. I wanted Mary to go too, but she was very decided in her refusal.
She wasn't going to leave her aunt alone these long wintry nights, she
said, tho' I don't think that was the real reason, for was there not
Martha? I wonder if women ever give the real reasons for their actions.
Why should Faith make a point of going, I asked myself, and Mary demand
to be left at home. On the first point Mary herself enlightened me,
being more ready to speak of Faith's actions than her own.

"It's plain enough why she wants to show George a kindness now," said
Mary.

"Aye?"

"Can't ta see her heart's reproaching itself? She were more nor hauf i'
love wi' George, an' no doubt thowt she could never fancy another."

"Well?"

"An' if there's one thing more nor another a woman sets store by, it's
her own constancy."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, and indeed. And now Faith feels herself slipping, an' she's going
to try to make it up to George for a treachery he'll never know of by
sitting through the trial. It's noan so much to please him as to satisfy
hersen."

Anyhow it was my father and Faith and Mr. Webster and myself that the
Cornwallis took up at ten of the clock one morning in January at the
sign of the Rose and Crown in Huddersfield. We might have joined it in
Slaithwaite on its way through the village from Manchester, but we
wanted to have as little talk and stir as possible. Mr. Blackburn's
clerk had got us decent lodgings near the Castle with a widow woman who
made a living by letting her rooms to witnesses attending the Assizes,
and whose whole talk was of the counsellors she had heard plead. She was
pleased to express her satisfaction when she learned we had secured Mr.
Brougham to defend George.

"Is he so clever a lawyer then?" asked Mr. Webster as we rested in the
parlour after our long, cold, tedious journey, and warmed ourselves as
well as we could before a fire on which it seemed to me the coals were
put on with the sugar tongs.

"Well," said Mrs. Cooke, for that was the garrulous old lady's name, "Of
course he is a clever lawyer, tho' they do say not so far learned nor so
deep as some we've known in York in my time, but it isn't that will help
you in a case like this."

"I do not take you, madam," observed Mr. Webster.

"You see Mr. Brougham has a great name in the city with the Whigs, and
if yo' can get a sprinkling of them gentry on the jury it will go a
great way in the poor young man's favour."

"All we ask is an upright and an intelligent jury," said Mr. Webster.

"That's all very well for you, sir, that's safe and sound by a good fire
and a clean soft bed before you. But from what I've read, sir, that
young friend of yours will do better with a jury that will lean a bit;
and trust Mr. Brougham for making the most of his chances with the
jury."

"Will he be allowed to speak to them?" I asked.

"Dear me, no," said the lady, proud to air her knowledge of the law.
"And a mercy it is it is so, for if such a counsellor as Mr. Brougham
could talk to the jury for a prisoner, half the rogues now hanged would
be walking the county. But there's ways an' means sides talking, a
shrug, a question to a witness, a meaning look at the gentlemen in the
box, and above all a quarrel with my lord."

"What! quarrel with the judge?" exclaimed my father. "Surely that would
be fatal."

"Not a bit of it," explained our landlady. "It's the safest card of all
to play. You see the judge is sure to be against the prisoner."

"Nay, my good lady, surely nay," remonstrated Mr. Webster. "Ye shall do
not unrighteousness in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of
the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness
shalt thou judge thy neighbour."

"Ah! that's in the Bible, I take it," said Mrs. Cooke; "but the Bible's
one thing and York Assizes is another, and so you'll find, unless I'm
very much mistaken. The Government will take care to send judges that
mean hanging, and that's so well known that it sets the back of the jury
up a bit, particler if a touch of politics can be dragged into the case.
That's Mr. Brougham's chance, and if he can make the jury think the
judge is pressing things too hard against your man, I won't say but he
may have a chance. But it isn't much to cling to after all, poor lad."

The night before the trial, which was fixed for Wednesday the sixth of
January, Mr. Blackburn was to see George in the Castle cell. By much
insistence he prevailed on the Governor to permit Mr. Webster to
accompany him, a great favour, and one, we understood, little to the
liking of the prison chaplain. When the little man returned to our mean
lodgings, he was pale and downcast and sat for a long time silent,
bending over the sullen fire.

"God preserve me from such a scene again," at length he said. "To think
that one whose face I have seen upturned to mine in my own chapel should
now be prisoned in yonder noisome cell. Oh! my friends, 'surely the ways
of transgressor are hard.'"

"If it were not to distress yo' too much we should like to hear all from
the beginning," said my father.

"Well, when we got to the gate of the gaol," said Mr. Webster, "Mr.
Blackburn rang the bell. A jailor opened it after such unlocking and
unbarring as you never heard."

'To see a prisoner,' said Mr. Blackburn.

'An attorney, sir? Your name?'

'Mr. Blackburn, of Huddersfield. For George Mellor and others to be
tried to-morrow.'

'And your friend?'

'Mr. Webster, a good minister of the gospel.'

'He cannot enter, sir, unless by special order of the governor.'

'It is here.'

'Then enter and follow me. Write your name and address in this book.'

"He was a big, burly man, and treated Mr. Blackburn with great respect;
but he looked hard at me from under his bushy eyebrows, till I bethought
me to slip a crown piece into his hand, when he became more civil. He
had a bunch of great keys by his side, and they jingled as he walked. We
followed him across a courtyard, where there was more unlocking of gates
and doors, and at length we were in a stone-flagged corridor with
whitewashed walls, and on either side of these the cells. There was a
little spy-hole in the door of every cell, through which, I judged, the
warders might watch the wretches chained within. Before one door the
warder stopped."

'This is your man, sir,' he said, and selecting a key turned the lock
and threw open the door. 'I'll stand outside, sir.'

"Mr. Blackburn nodded and entered the cell, I at his heels, much daunted
by the cold and the gloom. It was a little while ere my eyes got used to
the darkness, but as we entered I heard the clank of irons, and was
aware of some form in the gloom rising in the corner from under the
grated window. It was George; but oh! how altered! he was gaunt and
thin, and his eyes that I have known so bright and lit by the joy of
life, were dull and fixed in sick despair. I forgot the crime of which
he stands charged and saw only a brother, nay, a son, suffering in
mortal agony, and all my heart bled for him."

"Poor George! Poor Matty," murmured my father, passing the back of his
hand over his face, and Faith's eyes were fixed with pained intentness
on the preacher's face, her lips pale and parted as she held her breath
and waited on his every word.

"'Mr. Webster!' he cried, for he could see better than I, being used
doubtless to the little light. 'Mr. Webster, oh! this is good of you!'
and he seemed to take no heed of Mr. Blackburn, and as well as he could
for the irons that cribbed his arms, he stretched out his hands to me,
oh! so wildly and so lovingly, and I took both his hands in mine and
must have done tho' I had seen the deed with my own eyes. And George
bowed his head, and tears fell upon our clasped hands that were not
wholly his nor wholly mine, and I drew down his head and kissed him on
the brow."

"The good Lord bless yo'," sobbed Faith.

"And Mr. Blackburn stood a little way off fumbling with his papers and
taking snuff very rapidly and in great quantities."

'Have yo' seen mi mother lately?' asked George; 'does she bear up? Is
she here in York?' "His first thoughts were of her, poor lad."

"Yo' munnot forget to tell her that, Faith," said my father, and Faith
nodded, and I know she did not forget, and it comforted my Aunt Matty in
the after days.

"I told him only you and Ben were here," continued Mr. Webster. "'Not
Mary?' he asked, and I told him no. 'Better not, happen better not,' he
said at last; but he seemed disappointed that Mary should not be here, I
know not why."

"Did he ask for me?" said Faith, very softly.

"Nay," said Mr. Webster. "He did not ask for thee; but I told him yo'
wer' here and would not be denied."

"And what said he?"

'Faith! Faith Booth? Ah! poor John's sister. 'Oo'd over a tender heart,
an' I loved her brother next to Ben.'

"Yes, he loved my brother," said Faith, "but not as John loved him." And
after that she was very silent; only once I heard her murmur to herself,
"Yes, he loved mi brother."

"Well then," said Mr. Webster, "for a while Lawyer Blackburn talked with
George in a low voice so's the warder at the door might not hear what
passed, and I tried to compose my thoughts, so that I might, if time and
opportunity favoured, say some word that he might take to his heart to
solace him withal. And when Mr. Blackburn began to tie up his papers and
bid him bear himself like a man, on the morrow, and hope for the best, I
asked George it he would pray with me. He did not refuse; but sat upon a
little block that served for his seat, and I fell upon my knees and the
lights streamed upon my face from between the bars. Mr. Blackburn turned
his back and affected to busy himself with his bag, and the warder
jingled his keys, impatient to be gone. And then I prayed the good God
and Father to send peace and comfort to our dear brother, that. He might
be pleased that this great sorrow should pass and this black cloud be
lifted; but throwing all upon the mercy and compassion of the Heart that
feels for all, for all, even for the outcast and the sinful. For the
love of that Heart passeth the love of man and of woman, else woe and
still woe, aye even for the chosen ones of Israel."

And Mr. Webster's voice broke into a sob, and he bowed his head upon his
breast and would say no more, and more we did not seek to know.

In the evening I strolled into the city, walking round that great
Cathedral of the North, and marvelled at the piety that had raised so
splendid a temple to the glory of God. Then my steps turned towards the
Castle, and I gazed from afar at the gloomy keep, and wondered behind
which of the barred windows so high and narrow, lay my helpless cousin,
tossing, I doubted not, upon a sleepless pallet, his mind wracked with
thoughts of the morrow and his pillow, perchance, haunted by the image
of him whose blood, I could not but think, was upon his rash and impious
hand. I wandered by the narrow streets that approach the Castle, streets
abandoned to squalor and to vice, my feet turned ever toward that
monster dungeon, drawn by I know not what silent fascination. But as I
walked as in a dream, I was brought to a stand by a gruff voice:

"Halt or I fire!"

And peering into the dark, scarce lightened by the oil-lamps that swayed
in the streets, I saw that a company of soldiers was drawn across the
street, and a sergeant in command held his musket at my breast.

"Have you business at the Castle and a pass?" he asked, and on my
answering him nay he bid me begone. I turned sadly away, and when by
chance I tried another street that led Castle-wards my fate was the
same. So I turned my back upon the gloomy fortress and wended my way
back to our lodgings. The city was filled with troops, and every avenue
to the Castle strongly guarded; for a rescue was feared. Had they known
the Luds as well as I they might have spared their pains.

The morning of the trial came, dark and threatening, with snow that
wrapped the city as in a winding sheet, which befitted well a day so
pregnant with all ill. We were at the Castle gates betimes, and yet the
entrance to the Court was besieged with those like ourselves furnished
with a permit to view the trial. My inches stood me in good stead, and
by dint of good play with my elbows, I made way through the crowd for
those that companied me. It seemed to me that all the ways that led to
the Court were held by troops, and men stood to their arms on the very
steps and to the great doors of the Hall of Justice. Faith hung
trembling upon my arm, but craned her neck nevertheless to see the
gallant show when the judges drew up, clad in crimson robes, with the
sheriff and his chaplain by their sides, the heralds blaring their
trumpets and the soldiers grounding their arms to make the pavement
ring.

We made our way into the little Court and gazed upon the arms of England
fixed high above the judgment seat, and when we saw the wigged gentlemen
below the Bench rise to their feet we rose too, and when they bowed we
bowed too, but the judges, tho' they bent their heads to the gentlemen
of the long robe, took scant enough notice of our reverences, which
methinks was neither in keeping with the civility that man owes to man
nor yet in accord with our constitution: for if the judges draw their
dignity from the Crown, whence, I ask, does the Crown derive its title
and its lustre? But alas! the people of this country, even yet, are
little conscious of their own strength and of what is due to the commons
even from their princes and governors.

"Which is Mr. Brougham?" I asked my father, who I knew had heard him
speak at a great meeting of the Whig voters.

"Him that Mr. Blackburn's speaking to," answered my father, and I
followed his eyes to the attorney's well and saw a little man, sallow
and clean shaven, with a long lean face, something like a monkey's with
its skin turned, to parchment.

"What him?" I whispered in amaze.

"Aye, that's him sure enough."

"What! the great Brougham, our Brougham?"

"Yes, yes," said my father testily. "He's not much to look at; but yo'
should hear him talk."

But soon there was a hush in Court. The prisoners were being brought
into the dock, and the Cryer was calling his quaint "Oyez."

George Mellor, William Thorpe and William Smith stood there, heavily
ironed and guarded by armed warders, confronting the judges and the
jury, arraigned for that they did feloniously, wilfully, and of their
malice aforethought kill and murder William Horsfall, against the peace
of our lord the king, his crown and dignity. The jurors were sworn, the
challenges allowed, the indictment read by the Clerk of Arraigns, and
the prisoners given in charge to the jury, the clerk gabbling the words
as I have heard a curate in a hurry read the lessons in Church. "How say
you, George Mellor--guilty or not guilty," and George with a voice that
did not falter and a look upon judges and the jury that did not flinch,
cried "Not Guilty." I had eyes and ears only for him, neither then nor
to the end. Thorpe and Smith might not have been there, for me. I kept
my eyes fixed on him throughout, nor missed one single movement of his
nervous fingers that clutched the rails of the dock, nor one glance of
his eye. Nay, even now, right through the years, I can see the curl of
his lips when Benjamin Walker with craven look and uncertain step, his
eyes shifting, his voice whining, stumbled into the witness-box. All
through, I had eyes, I say, only for George. When Mr. Park, the counsel
for the Crown, addressed the jury, I scarce listened; I watched only
George's face, and judged rather what was said by the play of his pale
features than by ought I gathered from the long speech to the jury. And
right through that weary trial, that lasted from nine o'clock of the
morning till near the same hour of the night, never was there a moment
that George bore himself save as those who loved him would have him. He
almost looked at times as tho' he did not hear what passed around him,
his eyes being fixed, not upon the judge but beyond him, with a far away
gaze as tho' scenes were acting in a theatre none but he could see, and
which concerned him more than what passed around. Once when his eyes
ranged the faces that thronged the Court, and he saw our little group, a
look of recognition passed upon his face, and he smiled faintly, with
quivering lips; but presently turned away his head and glanced our way
no more. Only when Ben Walker stood in the box did he rouse himself to
the full, and he looked the slinking wretch straight in the face with
curling lip: and Walker blanched and tottered and half raised his hand
as tho' to ward off a blow. My God! rather would I raise my naked face
to meet ten thousand blows from an iron hand than meet such a look as
George cast upon that perjured miscreant. A low hiss went through the
Court, a sibilation of hatred and contempt; and even the counsellor that
examined the man did not conceal his loathing. We looked for Mr.
Brougham to cross-examine Walker, but that was done by Mr. Hullock,
whether that Mr. Hullock was the senior counsel and took this part as of
right, or that, as some had it afterwards, Mr. Brougham knew from the
first that the case was hopeless and did not care to be prominent, where
defeat was certain. Tho' this surely must be of malice. But it mattered
not: the end was certain even before Mr. Justice le Blanc summed up, and
in a few words, not without their truth even we felt, brushed away the
flimsy edifice of an alibi that had cost Soldier Jack so much scheming
and ferreting out of witnesses. "Even supposing the witnesses to come
under no improper bias or influence in what they are saying, they are
speaking," commented the judge, "of a transaction which not only took
place a long time ago, but was not imputed to the prisoners at the bar
till a considerable time after it had taken place, and nothing happened
immediately after the transaction to lead persons who have spoken as to
the prisoners' movements at the time of the murder, particularly to
watch, so as to be accurate in the hour or time on that particular
evening, when they saw these persons at a particular place, and we know
how apt persons are to be mistaken, even when care is taken, in point of
time."

That was all we got from judge or counsel for our money, my Aunt Matty's
hundred pounds, and many a good guinea to that which my father paid Mr.
Blackburn, and I question whether it was worth the brass. But I would
not have had George undefended for all that, even if it were all to do
over again; for to have him spoken for was the only way now left us to
show our care for him.

I never saw sentence of death passed but that once, and it will do me
my life-time. "That you, the three prisoners at the bar, be taken from
hence to the place from whence you came, and from thence, on Friday
next, to the place of execution; that you be there severally hanged by
the neck until you are dead; and your bodies afterwards delivered to the
surgeons to be dissected and anatomized, according to the directions of
the statute. And may God have mercy on your souls."

"Amen!" said many a hushed and awe struck voice, and I heard a moan and
a hasty cry from Mr. Webster. A piercing shriek rent the stillness, and
Faith fell fainting into my arms.

But one day intervened between the trial of Mellor, Thorpe and Smith and
their execution. Mr. Webster was allowed to see the three condemned men
the night before the Friday on which they were to make their piteous
end. He shrank from that last interview in the cells with the
sensitiveness of a woman; but he had a great soul in a little body and
nerved himself to the painful ordeal. He told us something of what
passed. Thorpe was stolid as ever, and simply asked to be let alone, and
not pestered with questions. George declared that he would rather be in
the situation he was then placed, dreadful as it was, than have, to
answer for the crime of his accuser; and that he would not change
situations with him, even for his liberty and two thousand pounds.

"Well said," cried my father, when Mr. Webster, with many a sigh,
brought his tale to an end: "well said, there spoke our George. There
spoke the lad we used to be proud on, and he's in the right on it, and
so folk will say for all time to come."

"I urged him to forgive his enemies and to leave this sinful world in
charity with all mankind."

"An' what said he to that?"

"He said he'd nought to forgive to anybody but Ben Walker."

"Well, and him?"

"I urged him to forgive even Walker. 'Vengeance is mine: I will repay,
saith the Lord.'"

"Well, did he?"

"Nay, I found him obdurate on this point, though I pressed him hard. He
reiterated that before he forgave Walker he'd like to give him something
to forgive too. I could not but tell him he was entering the presence of
his Maker in a most unchristian frame of mind."

"Are yo' clear, Mr. Webster," asked my father, "that religion calls on
George to forgive Ben Walker?"

"There can be no question of it," was the answer. "Do we not pray
'Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us?'"

My father shook his head pensively. "It may be Scripture, parson, but it
isn't Yorkshire. Hast ta never heard that a Yorkshireman can carry a
stone in his pocket for seven years, then turn it and after another
seven years let throw and hit his mark?"

"It is an evil, an unforgiving, an unchristian frame of mind," quoth the
parson.

"That's as may be," replied my father, doggedly. "But what's born in the
bone will out in the flesh. For my part I'st uphowd George, an' if he'd
said he forgave that spawn o' the devil I should ha' thowt he met be a
saint, but he wer' a liar an' a hypocrite for all that. It's agen natur,
Mr. Webster, it's agen natur."

Mr. Webster hastened to change the subject. "George sent a message for
yo', Ben. He knows how it is between you and Mary and he wishes you all
happiness, and asks you to forget and forgive the hasty words he spoke
when last you parted. He said you would know what he meant."

"God bless him, sir, I had forgiven them long ago."

"And if it will not go too hard against the grain he wants you to be at
the execution and to stand where his eye can fall upon you. He says he
should like his last thoughts to be of Holme and the dear ones there. He
seems strangely wrapped up in the old spot even to the exclusion of his
own mother."

"Aye," said my father. "George never got over Matty marryin' again. If
'oo'd never wed that John Wood but made a home for her own flesh an'
blood this met never ha' happened. But what is to be will be, an' that's
good Scripture anyway."

"Foreseen and foreordained even from the beginning," assented Mr.
Webster.

Now this request of George was to me of all things most painful. It was
common enough in those days for people to witness public executions; and
public executions were common enough in all conscience. But I had ever a
horror of such ghastly exhibitions. Nay I liked not even the
cock-fighting and bull-baiting that were as much our ordinary pastimes
in my youth as cricket has come to be the sport of my grand-children.
People called me Miss Nancy and mawkish and molly-coddle; but none the
less, neither for such sports, if sports they must be called, nor for
prize fighting, had I any stomach. But if it could give any help to
George to know one was in that vast crowd whose heart bled for him and
whose prayers went heavenwards with his soul, I could not but do his
will.

And so it befell that Mr. Webster and myself were in the crowd of many
thousands that stood before the scaffold. Two troops of cavalry were
drawn up in front of the drop. We might be a hundred yards away, and
when George, heavily ironed, was led to the verge of the platform to
make his last dying speech and confession, there was a great silence on
the multitude. Even a party of the gentry, as I suppose they called
themselves, that had secured the upper window of a house looking on to
the scaffold, and that were drinking and jesting and exchanging coarse
ribaldry with the light o' loves in the mob, ceased their unseemly
revelries and lent ear to what might be said. But George spoke little.
His eye fell on me and on Mr. Webster, whom I lifted from his feet so
that George might know that the little parson at Powle was faithful to
the last, and hoping that even at the eleventh hour repentance might
touch the stubborn and rebellious heart. And who knows but it did, for
the last words on earth that George spoke were said with his eyes fixed
on Mr. Webster's face, and they were spoken belike to him alone of that
great and swaying crowd: "Some of my enemies may be here. If there be, I
freely forgive them," and then, after a pause and with an emphasis which
we alone perchance of all that concourse understood, "I forgive all the
world and hope all the world will forgive me."

"The Lord above be praised!" exclaimed Mr. Webster, as these words fell
on his ears, and as the cap was fixed and the noose adjusted, he raised
his voice in the well-known hymn, and strange tho' it may seem, yet none
the less is it true, thousands of voices took up the words:

  "Behold the Saviour of mankind
     Nailed to the shameful tree!
   How vast the love that Him inclined
     To bleed and die for me!
   Hark how He groans! while nature shakes,
     And earth's strong pillars bend:
   The temple's veil in sunder breaks;
     The solid marbles bend.
   'Tis done! the precious ransom's paid--
     'Receive my soul,' He cries;
   See where He bows His sacred head!
     He bows His head, and dies!
   But soon He'll break death's envious chain,
     And in full glory shine:
   o Lamb of God! was ever pain,
     Was ever love like Thine!"

There was a haze before my sight. I did not see the bolt withdrawn; only
as through a mist see the quivering, swaying form. A long drawn sigh,
that ended in a sob like one deep breath from a thousand hearts,
proclaimed the end, and Mr. Webster and I made our way from that tragic
scene.



CHAPTER XIV.

AFTER this, life for many months was very grey at Holme. We did not talk
much about the grim days we had passed through. They were pleasant
neither to talk of nor think on. My father's mind was chiefly exercised
about the portentous length of Mr. Blackburn's bill of costs, and upon
some of the items he delivered himself at large:

"'Attending you,'" he quoted, "'when you instructed me to see John
Quarmby and James Eagland with a view to procuring their proofs for this
defence, 6s. 8d.'"

"Think o' that now," he would say, "actually charging me for calling to
tell him what to do, to put him up to his work, so to speak. My certy,
lawyers may well ma' their brass quick! Aw've a good mind to ha' it
taxed."

"What's that?" asked my mother.

"Why, there's a chap i' London 'at's put on by th' Lord Chancellor to go
through 'torneys' bills an' see they ha' not charged too much."

"He'll be a lawyer hissen, 'aw reckon?" queried my mother.

"Aye, aye," said my father, 'set a thief to catch a thief,' tha knows."

"Tha'd best pay up, aw doubt na, awn heard folk tell o' fallin' out wi'
the devil an' goin' below for justice, an' this taxin' 'll be after th'
same fashion. Th' first loss is th' least loss, an' 'what can't be cured
mun be endured.' If folk will ha' law they mun pay for their whistle,
an' you've had yo'r run for yo'r money."

"Aw could ha' thoiled it better if they'd let Mr. Brougham speik to th'
jury. Here's twenty guineas to him, to say nowt o' two guineas for his
clerk, that did nowt 'at aw can hear tell but draw th' brass for his
mester, an' him never allowed to oppen his mouth to th' jury!!"

"But he's had th' brass ha' not be?" asked the partner of my father's
joys and sorrows.

"Aye, he's had it safe enough."

"Well, by all accounts," concluded my mother, "it's ill gettin' butter
out o' a dog's throat." And the bill was paid: the only discount my
father got being a pinch of snuff from Mr. Blackburn's silver box.

Faith was not with us now, nor did she return till hay-time. She had
gone home to her father at the vicarage at Low Moor, but not without a
promise to return in the summer. And about that time too, Soldier Jack
became slack in his attendance at Powle Moor, tho' abating nothing in
his respect for Mr. Webster. He had been away for the week-end, having
said nothing of his intentions, but it turned out he had been to Low
Moor to see Faith and her father, and after this Jack began to go, in a
rather shame-faced way at first, to Church. I asked him what was the
reason of this right-about face.

"Well, yo' see, Ben," he explained, "th' service at th' Church is more
reg'lar like an' more constitutional."

"As how?"

"Well, yo' see, I'm a soldier, an' aw believe i' discipline."

"Yo' broke it often enough, bi all accounts," I ventured to remind him.

"Na, Ben, no back reckonin'! Yo' mun consider that aw wer' young then
an' lawless. Aw'n sown mi wild oats nah, an' settled down an' aw begin
to see that law an' order's a very guid thing, an' authority mun be
respected."

"Well, cannot yo' respect it as much at th' Powle as at th' Church?"

"Now, aw cannot; an' yo cannot, nother. Yo' see yo're dissenters at th'
Powle, an' heresy an' schism an' rebellion against constituted authority
are i' th' air, so to speak, on Powle Moor. Yo're all Republicans at'
heart up yonder, an' aw'll tell yo', another thing, if there'd been no
dissenters there they'd ha' been no Luds, an' George Mellor 'd noan ha'
danced out th' world on nowt."

"But Faith Booth were Church an' yet she went to th' Powle while she
wer' wi' us, an' had a class there into th' bargain."

"Faith's a woman," said Soldier, "an' women ha' no sense o' principle.
She wer' your guest, an' wouldn't pain yo' by going elsewheer. That's
what yo' call nat'ral politeness, an' we should be none the worse i'
Sloughit for a little more on it. But what we're talkin' on now is a
matter o' th' head not a matter o' th' heart, an' i' matters o' th' head
a woman's nowt to go by. Yo' shud hear her father, th' owd vicar at Low
Moor!"

"Oh! he's yo'r text, is he?"

"He put it i' this way. Th' Church o' Christ is an army--the Church
militant, he called it. Th' king, God bless him, is th' head o' th'
Church, jus' same as he's th' head o' th' army. Th' Archbishops is
commanders-in-chief, th' Bishops is generals, the Rectors an' Vicars is
colonels an' captains, an' Curates is th' lieutenants."

"And what of corporals and sergeants?" I asked.

"Th' vicar's warden, to be sure," said Jack promptly, "an' just yo' see
if aw dunnot live to be vicar's warden afore aw dee o' old age: an' if
yo' want to speer further into it, th' Collect an' th' Liturgy is th'
Orders o' th' day an' the surplice an' hood's nobbud a uniform. So
theer!"

And Jack looked at me triumphantly.

"An' wheer do th' Dissenters come in then?" I asked.

"Well aw reckon you're like these volunteers 'at come up when folk wer'
fleyed o' Boney comin'. An' its th' same way i' religion. Folk turn
Methodies when they're in a scare about their souls; but for reg'lar
defence i' ordinary times, th' Church, as by law established, is enough
to ward off th' enemy o' mankind."

"And what does Faith say to all this?" I asked.

"Faith's a very sensible lass, an' wi' a very proper notion o'
discipline," replied Jack. "I tried her t'other day wi' th' text 'wives,
submit yourselves unto your own husbands as unto the Lord. For the
husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the
Church.'"

"Well?" I asked.

"An' Faith upholds every word of it, an' thinks 'at a woman 'at has a
husband 'oo can respect an' look up to, 'll ma' no bones about obeyin'
him in all things lawful."

"Well, well," I said, "I've no doubt some strapping young fellow will
come along some day, and Faith will have a chance o' squaring preaching
wi' precept."

"Aw don't know so much about a strapping young felly," said Jack,
curtly. "Yo' young chaps think a wench has no eyes for owt but inches
an' spirits. Faith's noan o' that breed. 'Oo thinks a husband owt to be
older nor th' wife, so's 'oo can lean on him an' look to him for
guidance."

"Aye," I said, "Faith's just turned twenty. Th' man owt to be
five-an-twenty."

"Five-an-forty, if a minnit," cried Jack.

And I laughed in his face.

"What, Jack! caught at last! And what about the decent elderly widow
'wi' summat i' th' Bank 'at mi mother's lookin' for'?"

"Ben, quit thi jokin'; it's no jokin' matter, isn't this. Aw tell yo',
Ben, if aw can win Faith Booth for mi wife, aw'st go dahn o' mi knees
an' thank God wi' all mi heart for th' best gift even God can give--a
pure an' good woman. Th' owd Book well says--'A crown unto her
husband.' An' aw'm not wi'out my hope, Ben. But aw'm fleyed on her, man;
aw'm fleyed on her."

"What! a soldier fleyed on a woman, Jack?"

"Aye, Ben, aw'm fleyed on her! Sometime's when 'oo's sat quiet by th'
hearth, there's a look comes on to her face, that aw shouldn't be
surprised any minnit if th' ceiling oppened up, an' 'oo just floated
away to Heaven. An' yo' nivver see her in a temper, like other women,
th' best on 'em; an' yo nivver hear a cross word fra her, nor hear her
gigglin' an' laughin' like other lasses--peas in a drum, th' cracklin'
o' thorns under a pot, that's what they mind me on. She's just too good
to live, is Faith, an' aw'm not worthy 'to touch the hem of her
garment,' an' that's a fact."

And Jack made off with an agitated limp; but from such like talk and a
hint or two that Mary let fall, my mother ceased her quest for the
prudent elderly widow, tho' not without giving a very uncompromising
opinion that there was no fool like an old fool.

"Tho'," she added, "if it wer' to be a young 'un, it couldn't ha' been a
better nor Faith, an' that aw will say; but as for wives being obedient
to their husbands"--for I had taken, occasion to enlighten her as to
Jack's views on the blessed estate--"it's well known St. Paul, good
man, was a bachelor, an' bachelors' wives is same as owd maids' childer,
like nowt in heaven above, nor the earth beneath--nor in the water
under the earth," she added, to complete the text.

It was about this time that Mary had an unexpected visitor. It would be
in July, as near as I can remember. I was piking in the barn, and there
being a good yield that year, it needed all my height and a long pike to
reach to the top of the hay bowk when it neared the roof. Mary and Faith
were raking in the field, and Martha had been with the last bottle of
home-brewed for the hay-makers.

We had always three or four Irishmen that came regularly year after year
to earn their rent at the English harvesting. One of them, Micky, taught
me to count up to twenty in Irish, so that I may claim to know a little
of foreign languages, and if they are all like Irish, I pity the man
that has to learn more of them. I had gone to the barn door, looking
placidly across the field where Bob stood in the traces yoked to the
hurdle on which we dragged the sweet new hay to the mistal; the sun was
westering, and the grateful breezes fanned me with cool and gentle
touch. The girls in the field had thrown off the large straw hats they
wore in the noon heat, their tresses had escaped their coils, and they
moved but slowly with the rakes, following the wake of the hurdle, for
we had had a long and hard day, and all were fain our work was nigh
done, and the hay, thank God, well won. My mother had gone into the
house, for she had long ceased to take any part in the hay-making, and I
made no question she was getting ready the baggin'. I saw her come to
the house door, and heard her shout:

"Mary! Ben! come hither; aw want yo;" and she waved her arms to motion
us in.

"Throw yo'r rakes dahn, an' come naa," came another cry, and there was
that in my mother's voice which told us this was no ordinary summons to
a meal.

Mary and I made for the house hot-foot. My mother met us at the door.

"There's Ben Walker i' th' parlour an' his mother," she said; "an
they've come to talk to thee, Mary--aw thowt Ben had better come as
weel."

"Aw winnot see 'em," said Mary.

"That's right," I said. "Tell 'em to tak' their hook, mother. They're
none wanted here."

"Tell 'em thissen, Ben. It's more o' yo'r business nor mine, an' more or
Mary's nor yo'rs. Both on yo' see 'em's my advice, an' if yo' think
they'll eit yo', I'll stand by to see fair play."

"Aw'm none fit to be seen. Wait till aw tidy misen up a bit," said Mary,
fastening her dress at the neck and prisoning some stray tresses of her
hair.

"Yo're good enough for the likes o' them," said my mother, "an' aw'm
none goin' to have 'em sittin' on th' best furniture i' th' house longer
nor aw can help. They'll noan do it ony good. Let's in, an' ha' it
ovver, an' dunnot pick yo'r words, either, wi' that lot: aw shannot, yo'
may depend."

You never did see in your life such a beau as Ben Walker that day. His
mother was fine dressed, with a big gold brooch and a gold chain round
her neck and reaching like a rope down to her waist, and all the colours
of the rainbow in the silks she wore. But Ben! you should have seen him!
It was a sight for sore eyes. They called his father "Buck," but him I
never saw in the days of his glory. But if he could out-buck Ben he was
a Buck indeed. Why, his vest was a flower garden in miniature, and if
he'd dipped his head in the treacle pot it couldn't have been stickier.
Somebody must have crammed him that the tailor makes the man: but Lord!
a tailor from heaven, if there are such there, couldn't have made a man
of Ben Walker. Neither could ale nor strong waters. He had evidently
been trying for a bit back to import courage from Holland, for his face
was patchy and mezzled and his eye was filmy and his body jerky. We had
heard that he was making the money fly down at th' Brigg, tho' it was
not easy to get anyone to drink with him. However, here he was, and it
was not difficult to guess his errand.

My mother eyed the pair of them with a look of fine disdain and offered
them neither a hand nor a chair.

"Well, what's your business here," she said, "onybody 'at knew owt 'ud
know this is none a time for visitin', th' hay out an' th' glass goin'
down wi' a run, 'at awst be' capped if it doesn't knock th' bottom out,
one o' these days."

"Aye, the weather's very tryin' indeed for th' poor farmers," said Mrs.
Walker, "an' for them 'at has to depend for their livins on a few pounds
worth o' hay. But yo' see gentlefolk needn't bother their yeds abaat
sich things. Wet or fine doesn't matter so much to them. When it's too
wet for walkin' they can ride."

"Aye," put in my mother, "we all know weel enough where a beggar rides
to, if yo' put him on horse-back. But what's yo'r business, aw say?"

"Can't yo' speik, Ben?" said Mrs. Walker, "what's ta stand theer for,
like a moonstruck cauf?"

"Aw wud like to speak wi' Mary here," said Ben.

"Well, it's a free country," said Mary, "an' there's no law agen
speakin'."

"By thissen, aw mean."

"Well, tha cannot, that's all. If tha's owt to say to me, tha mun say it
afore Ben Bamforth."

"Ben Bamforth, indeed!" said Mrs. Walker. "Mind yo'r manners, lass, or
it'll be worse for yo', an' speik more respectful when yo' speik to yo'r
betters. Does ta know tha'rt speikin' to two thousand pund?"

"Aw sud say t' same if aw wer' speikin' to th' king's mint, if Ben
Walker wer' one o' th' stamps," retorted Mary hotly.

"Yo'll alter yo'r tune afore th' week's out, my lass," put in Mrs.
Walker. "In a word, will ta ha' our Ben here? What he's so set on thee
for 'mazes me. But he is set on thee, an' yo' sud be thankful he'll cast
a look yo'r way when it's wi' th' quality he sud be speikin' at this
very minnit, i'stead o' draggin' his mother up this rutty owd hill to a
tumbledown ram-shackle owd sheep-pen not fit for a lady to put her foot
inside on. Will ta ha' him, an' be a lady in silk an' satins, an' a
servant o' yo'r own, an' a gig to drive abaat in, an' th' fat o' th'
land to live' on?"

"Noa, aw winnot, aw winnot, aw winnot, so there's yo'r answer, an' if he
comes near me or after me agen, there's one'll fetch as many colours on
his back as th' weaver's put in his weskit."

"Then awst dahn to Milnsbrig this very neet," said Ben Walker, "an' tell
owd Radcliffe all aw know abaat Rawfolds, an' that long-legged tally o'
yo'rn shall go th' same gait as Mellor an' Thorpe."

And now I had a lucky inspiration--like a flash came into my head what
Mr. Radcliffe had said to me: 'Thank your stars, Justice Radcliffe does
not listen to every idle story that comes to his ears.' So I drew a bow
at a venture:

"Go to Mr. Radcliffe and welcome," I said. "Tha's been before, an' told
him all tha knows, an' more nor yo' could prove, an' yo' know nowt came
on it. Dost think he'll tak more heed o' a second telling?"

Ben Walker and his mother exchanged glances and their faces fell, so I
gathered courage and pushed my advantage.

"Go! aw tell yo'. Aw've known 'at yo' tell'd him long sin' all yo' knew
about me, an' he put it aside. Aw've noan yo' to thank 'at aw'm here to
tell yo' on it."

"Who telled yo'?" gasped Ben, off his guard. "Mr. Radcliffe hissen," I
cried, with the ring of triumph in my voice, "an' he towd me, too, if
ever I fun out who'd peached, aw'd his permission to break every bone in
his body, an', by God, if yo'r not off this hillside before aw count
twenty, aw'll take him at his word," and I strode with uplifted arm
towards the craven that shrank away. He needed no second telling, and
his mother followed him crest-fallen: and never but once again did Ben
Walker, to my knowledge, set foot on the threshold he had trod so often
as a tolerated if not a welcome guest.

"Whatever did ta mean, Ben?" said my mother to me, when she had watched
the pair part way down the hill, to make sure, she said, they pocketed
nought: "Whatever did ta mean?"

"Never yo' mind, mother," I replied. "There's no good i' talking
overmuch about such things. Anyway, it's been enough for yon' lot an'
that should be good enough for you."

"Aw do believe he made it," said my mother to Mary, in a tone of
admiration. And from that day she conceived a higher respect for my
intellect than years of honest truth had been able to inspire.

Only once again, I say, did Ben Walker, to my knowledge, sot foot on our
doorstep. He tarried in Huddersfield for some months and his money
flowed like water. Then he disappeared, and it was said he had gone to
America with a woman who was no better than she should be. Truth was,
the Brigg was getting too hot to hold him. The men who had been in the
Luddite business began to pluck up heart as the time went on and no more
arrests were made. And one fine night the man who kept the toll-gate at
the Brigg heard loud cries for mercy, and rushing out was just in time
to see the heels of a dozen men and to drag a drowning wretch out of the
cut. It was Ben Walker, and he was all but done for. Then, I say, he
vanished, and for years I heard no word of him. Then one wintry
night--November I think it was--Mary and I were sat in the house by
the fireside, she in the rocking chair my mother had loved of old and
knitting as I had seen her that was gone knitting so often that the
thread seemed a very part of my own life's warp; and I was sat smoking
my evening pipe in the chair he that was gone had made to us more sacred
than any monument in church or chapel, and the old clock was ticking
steadily on to the bed-hour as sturdily as it had ticked for more years
than I can tell. Only there was not to be heard through the rafters the
heavy snoring of 'Siah as it had been heard in my father's days. 'Siah
was snoring, I doubt not, but in a bed and a house of his own, and the
not too gentle breathing of Martha swelled the harmony of his own.

There came a knock at the door that gave us both a start. We had heard
no footstep, and Vixen, a waspish daughter of the Vixen of other days,
had not given tongue.

Who could it be?

"Does Mister Bamforth live here?" queried a voice that stirred a memory
of I knew not what, but something painful, and my mind, without my
willing it, was off on the scent.

"He does. Dos't want him?" I said, barring the entrance but holding the
door half open, whilst Mary had risen to her feet and held the light
above her head, to see the better.

"Aw've tramped fra Manchester, an' awn had newt to eit sin break o' day,
an' aw beg yo' for the love of God to gi' me a crust an' th' price o' a
bed or let me lie me dahn i' th' mistal."

And as he spoke and his face struck stronger at me, it all came back.

"It's Ben o' Buck's," I cried.

"It's Ben o' Buck's," he said in a low voice, and hung down his head and
said no more. I was for banging the door in his face, the hot blood
surging to my face and anger and scorn in my heart.

But Mary took the loaf and a slice of cheese from the table where our
supper lay, and a coin from the window sill where the milk money was,
and gave it to him, but turned her eyes from him as she gave it. And I
knew that Mary had taken the better part, and there was no longer anger
in my heart and I closed the door upon the figure that slouched away
into the cold dark night.

Yes: Mary and I were wed, and for the life of me I cannot remember that
I ever asked Mary to be my wife. I always tell her she did all the
love-making. Did she not put her arms about my neck, and did she not
tell Long Tom she meant to wed me. To be sure it was a Leap Year, and
that accounts for it.

I overheard Mary telling Martha that our wedding day was fixed. It was
to be in October--on the sixteenth--to be exact.

"Then that settles it," said Martha.

"Settles what?" asked Mary.

"Th' day for t' spurrins," replied our maid; "'Siah's been puttin' it
off, an' puttin' it off, tho' awn egged him on never so; but nah, aw'll
ha' no more dallyin'. Aw'd fixed i' mi mind to be wed on th' same day as
yo' and Ben, if aw couldn't afore, an' not another day longer will aw
wait. If 'Siah winnot put 'em up aw'll do it misen, an' that aw'll let
him know."

"But perhaps 'Siah doesn't want to get wed," suggested Mary.

"What's that to say to it?" asked Martha. "If he doesn't know who'll
mak' a good wife, aw know who'll mak' a good husband. An' 'Siah's just
that soft, aw sud be feart o' any other 'ooman puttin' on 'im, an' that
'ud just fret me to skin an' bone, to see onybody else puttin' on 'im
an' me no right to stan' up for him."

"But a woman cannot put th' spurrins up," objected Mary.

"Then aw'st ma' 'Si."

"But how if he's loath?"

"Aw'st bray him."

"What! 'Siah?"

"Aye, Mary, an' if yo'll tak' my advice, an' yo' may need it now yo're
goin' to be wed yersen, never let on to be fleyed o' yo'r man. First
time aw gay' 'Si' a bat, mi heart come into mi mouth an' mi knees
knocked one agen t'other, yo'd a thowt aw wer' playin' a tune on th'
bones under mi petticoat; but, Lor' bless yo', he just oppened his mouth
an' gaped at me an' scratted his yed--'Well awm dalled,' says he, 'if
this doesn't beat th' longest day!'--an' so aw fot 'im another clout
wi' mi neive, an' bar tellin' me to be careful aw didn't hurt misen, an'
to hit wheer it wer' soft, if a soft place aw could find, 'Siah said
nowt; but it's done him gooid. He's more fleyed o' me nor ony two i' th'
Colne Valley," concluded Martha with legitimate pride.

And Soldier Jack and Faith made a match of it. We were all married on
the same day, in the same church, by the same parson. It was Mr. Coates,
the vicar at the Parish Church at Huddersfield, tied us, for neither at
the Slaithwaite Church nor at the Powle could that then be done. And a
gradely wedding we had, as is only right when three couples, all
friends, and all of a family after a fashion o' speaking, get wed on the
same day.

Faith and Mary were just enough to send a man off his head, as they
stood in their veils, and even Martha looked comely, for love put its
halo about her head. Mr. Coates couldn't keep his eyes off Mary and
Faith, for I reckon he didn't see two such pictures every day, and when
we went into the vestry to sign th' register:

"The Rose," says he, handing the quill pen for Mary to sign her name.
"And the lily," he added, with a smile and a courtly bow, like the
gentleman he was, to Faith.

"Nay, sir," said Mary, with a happy laugh, "Nay, sir, the lilies come
fra Golcar."

And now, my children, my story is told. You know more about the
Luddites, perhaps, than when you began to read it. You know how vain was
their attempt to stop the introduction of machinery. And no doubt
machinery has been a great boon. Why, I myself, as you know, run my own
mill by it.

But don't tell me the Luds were a bad lot--misguided, short-sighted,
ignorant, if you like, but rogues, and idle, dissolute
n'er-do-weels----No! and still no!

[THE END.]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Ben o' Bill's, The Luddite, by 
Daniel Frederick Edward Sykes and George Henry Walker

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEN O' BILL'S, THE LUDDITE ***

***** This file should be named 54030-8.txt or 54030-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/0/3/54030/

Produced by John Parkinson
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

